we'll see you back here for post debate coverage including analysis and interviews with the condition dates. the cnn democratic debate round two live from detroit starts right now. a pivotal point in the race for the presidency. >> ten candidates each with a chance to alter the course of this primary contest. >> they are back stage now. it's debate night for the d democrats. >> happening now in downtown detroit, the candidates facing off for a second night in michigan. donald trump won this battle ground state by fewer than 11,000 votes and the democrats want it back. >> donald trump threatens everything. >> i know predators, and we have a predator living in the white house. >> a critical rematch, former vice president joe biden aiming to reclaim his momentum. >> i don't believe there is anyone in this race more
prepared than me. >> senator kamala harris not backing down after clashing with biden over race. >> there is still a disagreement between him and i that remain. >> and senator cory booker who says president trump is ripping apart the fabric of the nation. >> donald trump wants us to fight him on his turf. that's not how we win. >> for two candidates just beyond center stage, opportunity and enterprise. former housing secretary julian castro. >> we're going to make sure that the promise of america is available to everyone. >> and entrepreneur andrew yang. >> the opposite of donald trump is an asian man that likes math. >> betting their campaigns on a defining issue for senator michael bennett, breaking gridlock. >> they have immobilized our federal government. >> for jay inslee the crisis. >> for congresswoman tuls
tulsi gabbard. >> the most important responsibility of the president is to serve in commander in chief. >> and bill de blasio. >> are you ready if fight? >> and kirstengillibrand. now the stage is set for candidates to take on hot button issues. >> we need to stop playing games for people seeking asylum. >> i will ban the importation of assault weapons, done. >> their party platform and the course of american history. >> now it is our turn. >> we choose hope over fear. we are the united states of america. ♪ ♪
an enthusiastic audience at the historic fox theater in downtown detroit, michigan. welcome to our viewers in the united states and around the world. watching us on cnn, cnn international, cnn in espanol, cnn.com and listening on sirus xm and the westwood one radio network. this is the cnn democratic presidential debate and a special welcome to the u.s. military members, diplomatic corp and their families serving overseas. i'm jake tapper anchor of the lead and state of the union with cnn's chief political correspondent dana bash and don lemon anchor of "cnn tonight". >> the 20 candidates were divided is into two groups by random drew earlier this month.
the first ten appeared last night and now its time for the second ten. >> please welcome from delaware former vice president joe biden. [ applause ] >> thank you. >> from california senator kamala harris. [ applause ] >> from new jersey, senator cory booker. [ applause ] >> from new york, businessman andrew yang. [ applause ]
>> from texas, former secretary of housing and urban development, julian castro. [ applause ] >> from hawaii congress woman tulsi gabbard. [ applause ] >> from new york, senator kirsten gillibrand. [ applause ] >> from washington state, governor jay inslee. [ applause ] >> from colorado, senator michael bennett.
[ applause ] >> from new york city, mayor bill de blasio. [ applause ] >> ladies and gentlemen, the democratic candidates for president of the united states. [ cheers ] >> please rise from the presentation of colors from post 2233 and the district four honor guard and please remain standing for our national anthem performed by grammy and tony award winning singer deedee bridge water who was raised in
flint michigan. >> honor guard. ♪ o say, can you see by the dawn's early light ♪ ♪ what so proudly we hailed at the twilight's
last gleaming? ♪ ♪ whose broad stripes and bright stars through the perilous fight ♪ ♪ o'er the ramparts we watched were so gallantly streaming? ♪ ♪ and the rockets' red glare the bombs bursting in air ♪ ♪ gave proof through the night that our flag was still there ♪ ♪ oh, say, does that star-spangled banner
yet wave ♪ ♪ o'er the land of the free ♪ ♪ and the home of the brave? ♪ [ applause ] the debate will begin right after this short break. [ applause ] biopharmaceutical researchers.
driven each day to pursue life-changing cures... in a country built on fostering innovation.
here, they find breakthroughs... like a way to fight cancer by arming a patient's own t-cells... and a new therapy that gives the blind a working gene so they can see again. because it's not just about the next breakthrough... it's all the ones after that. my grandparents that i never knew.ch about i'm a lawyer now, but i had no idea that my grandfather was a federal judge in guatemala. my grandfather used his legal degree and his knowledge to help people that were voiceless in his country. that put a fire in my heart. it made me realize where i got my passion for social justice. bring your family history to life like never before. get started for free at ancestry.com
so, every day, we put our latest technology and unrivaled network to work. the united states postal service makes more e-commerce deliveries to homes than anyone else in the country. welcome back to the contract cnn presidential democratic debate. a quick look at the ground rules to ensure a fair debate as moderators we'll attempt to guide the discussion. you'll each receive one minute to answer questions, 30 seconds for responses and rebuttals and 15 additional seconds if a moderator asks for a
clarification. the timing lights will remind you of these limits. please respect them and please refrain from interrupting other candidates during their a lotted time. a candidate infringing on another candidate's time will have his or her time reduced. we again, remind our audience inside the fox theater to try to remain silent when candidates are actively debating. the candidates need to be able to properly hear the candidates and each other. >> let's start with opening statements. you'll each receive one minute. mayor bill de blasio, please begin. >> to the working people of america, tonight i bring you a message of hope. we can make change in this country. i know from personal experience it can be done. when i became the mayor of the nation's large est city, i set on a path of bold change. they said it couldn't be done but we gave prek to every child for free. we got rid of stop and frisk and
lowered crime. we raised the minimum wage to $15 an hour. it can be done. tonight we have to get to the heart and soul of who we are as democrats. there are good people on this stage but real differences, joe biden told wealthy donors that nothing fundamentally would change if we were president. kamala harris said she's not trying to restructure society. well, i am. for 40 years, working people have taken on the chin in this country for 40 years the rich have gotten richer and they paid less and less in taxes. it cannot go on this way. when i'm president, we will even up the score and we will tax the hell out of the wealthy to make this a fairer country and to make sure it's a country that puts working people first. >> thank you mayor de blasio, senator michael bennett. >> thank you. last week i saw one of the trump signs that says america, love it or leave it.
and it was on the outside of a church, i love america. and i know we can make it better. before coming to the senate, i ran a larger school district where most of the kids live in poverty. those kids have exactly the same hopes that i had. their parents have exactly the same hopes for them that my parents had for me. and that susan and i have for our three children but for the last three years, we've been consumed by a president who frankly doesn't give a damn about your kids or mine. mr. president, kids belong in classrooms, not cages. [ applause ] >> and they deserve something
better than a bully in the white house. let's end this three-ring circus in washington and let's make this election about reclaiming our future for our kids and our democracy. empty promises won't beat donald trump, i can. >> governor jay inslee. >> good evening, i'm jay inslee. i am running for president because the people in this room and the democrats watching tonight are the last best hope for humanity on this planet. if, if we make defeating the climate crisis the top priority of the united states, we will have a fighting chance to save ourselves and our children's future. it has to be our top priority. my plan is one of national mobilization. quickly bringing 100% clean energy to americans, creating 8
million good union jobs. this is a big, bold ambitious plan for clean energy for a big, bold ambitious nation. middle ground approaches are not enough. we must confront the fossil fuel industry. i've been working on this for 25 years and now we know this, we're a tipping point and whether we shrink from this challenge or rise to it, is the vital question of our time. we democrats believe we can still do big things in this nation. we can defeat the climate crisis. let's get to work. >> senator kirsten gillibrand. >> my grandmother taught me nothing is impossible. she spent two generations organizing women in upstate new york. my mother taught me nothing is impossible. she was one of only three women in her law school class and worked with gay couples for
basic rights. if you want to get something done, just tell me it's impossible. as a trefreshman senator, i was told you couldn't repeal don't ask, don't tell. even members of my own party told me it wasn't convenient. when are civil rights ever convenient? we stood up to the pentagon and got it done, not impossible. ten years ago, i was told you couldn't pass health care for our 9/11 first responders. those heroes who raced up the towers when others were coming down, even when congress turned its back on them, we kept fighting. just last week we made the 9/11 health bill permanent. [ applause ] >> beating donald trump definitely not impossible. we need a nominee who will take on the big fights and win. we need a nominee who doesn't know the meaning of impossible. >> congresswoman tulsi gabbard.
>> i love our country. it's why i enlisted after 9/11. i've served as a soldier for over 16 years, deployed twice to the middle east and served in congress now for almost seven years. i know what patriotism is and i've known many great patriots throughout my life and let me tell you this, donald trump is not behaving like a patriot. as president, i will bring this spirit of real patriotism to the white house, serving the interest of all americans, not just the rich and powerful. i'll fight for our rights and freedoms of all americans upholding these principles in our constitution upon which our country was founded. fighting for justice and equality for all. fighting for every single american regardless of race or religion as we strive towards that more perfect union and as president, i'll bring this unifying spirit of love for untrynd the soldiers' values of service above self-to the
white house truly leading a government of, by and for the people. >> secretary julian castro. >> thank you, dana and good evening. you know, just a few days ago, we were reminded and inspired by our fellow americans in puerto rico that public service is not fundamentally about any of us, it's about you and your family. i want you to know that if i'm elected president that i will work hard every single day so that you and your family can have good health care when you need it so that your children and grandchildren can get a good education so that they can reach their dreams and that you can have good job opportunities whether you live here in a big city like detroit or in a small town in our country. i know we have a wonderful special nation but too many people are struggling and i know what that's like, too. i grew up with a single mom in a poor neighborhood, but like many
of you, i don't want to make america anything again. i don't want us to go backward. we're not going back to the past. we're not going back where we came from. we're going to move forward. we're going to make america better than its ever been in the years to come. let's do that together. [ applause ] >> andrew yang. >> if you heard anything about me and my campaign, you've heard that someone is running for president who wants to give every american $1,000 a month. i know this may sound like a gimmick but this is a deeply american idea from thomas payne to martin luther king to today. why do we need to do it? we automated away millions of manufacturing jobs and chances are your job can be next. if you don't believe me, ask an auto worker here in detroit. how do we pay for it? raise your hand in the crowd if you seen stores closing where you live. it is not just you. amazon is closing 30% of america's stores and malls and
paying zero in taxes while doing it. we need to do the opposite of much of what we're doing right now and the opposite of donald trump is an asian man who likes math. [ cheers ] >> so let me share the math. $1,000 a month for every adult would be $461 million every month right here in detroit alone. the automation of our jobs is the central challenge facing us today. it's why donald trump is our president and any politician not addressing it is failing the american people. >> senator cory booker. >> thank you, dana. last week the president of the united states attacked an american city calling it a disgusting rat infested rodent mess. we need a nation that understands that these tired old language, the --
>> stand by, senator. >> please stand by. [ applause ] >> please, continue, senator. >> tank you vehank you for much. donald trump from charleston to baltimore to the border is using the tired old language of demagogues of fear mongers and racist to divide our country against itself. we know who donald trump is, but in this election, the question is who are we as a people? we have serious problems in america. we have deep wounds and seriously deeply rooted
challeng challenges. we desperacembesperately need ta nation and move forward because we know in this country our fates are united, that we have a common destiny. the call of this election is the call to unite and common cause and common purpose. that's how we will beat donald trump. that's how i will beat donald trump, and as your president, that's how i will govern and move us forward together. [ applause ] >> senator kamala harris. >> this is an inflection moment in the history of our country. i think we all know that. this is a moment in time that is requiring us each as individuals and collectively to look in the mirror and ask a question. that question being who are we? and i think most of us know that part of the answer to that question is we are better than
this. so this then becomes a moment that we must fight for the best of who we are and fight of course, we will. and this is not a new fight for us as americans. we have always been prepared to fight for our i deals. i come from fighters. my sister maya and i joke we grew up surrounded by a bunch of adults that marched about this thing called justice and i'm prepared to march with you to fight with you for the best of who we are and to successfully prosecute the case of four more years of donald trump. and against him. [ applause ] >> vice president joe biden. >> tonight, i think democrats are expecting some engagement here. i expect we'll get it. i'm running for president to restore the soul of this
country. you know, we have a president as everybody acknowledged here, every day is ripping at the social fabric of this country, that no one man has the capacity to rip that apart. it's too strong. we're too good. just look at this stage, made up of diverse people from diverse backgrounds, went on to be mayors, senators, governors, congresswomen, members of the cabinet and yes, even a vice president. mr. president, this is america. and we are stronger and great because of this diversity, mr. president, not in spite of it, mr. president. so mr. president, let's get something straight. we love it. we are not leaving it. we are here to stay and we're certainly not going to leave it to you. [ applause ] >> thank you vice president biden. i want to start the debate with one of the top priorities for democratic voters and that is
health care. senator harris, this week you released a new health care plan which would preserve private insurance and take ten years to phase in. vice president biden's campaign calls your plan quote a habit every which way approach, and says it's just part of a confusing pattern of equivocating about your health care stance. what do you say to that? >> they are probably confused because they have not read it but the reality is i have been spending time in this campaign listening to american families, listening to experts, listening to health care providers, and what i came away with is a very clear understanding that i needed to create a plan that was responsive to the needs of the american people, responsive to their needs of understanding that insurance companies have been jacking up the prices for far too long, that american families have to be held down by deductibles and co-pays and premiums that can cause them bankruptcy. i listened to the american
families who said four years is just not enough to transition into this new plan so i devised a plan where it will be ten years of transition. i listened to american families who said i want an option that will be under your medicare system that allows a private plan. so i designed a plan where yes, responsive to the needs of american families, there will be a public plan under my plan for medicare and the private plan under my plan for medicare. because the bottom line is this, we must agree that access to health care must be a right and not just a police officrivilege who can afford it. 30 million people are going without access to health care. >> thank you senator harris. vice president biden, your response. >> my response is the senator had several plans so far and any time someone tells you you're going to get something good in ten years, you should wonder why it takes ten years. if you notice, there is no talk that the plan in ten years will
cost $3 trillion. you will lose your employer based insurance and in fact, you know, this is the single most important issue facing the public and be very blunt and to be very straightforward, you can't beat president trump with double talk on this plan. >> your response, senator harris. >> absolutely. vice president biden you're simply inaccurate. the reality is our plan will bring health care to all americans under a medicare for all system. our plan will allow people to start signing up on the first day, babies will be born into our plan and right now, 4 million babies almost are born every day -- or every year in america under our plan we will ensure everyone has access to health care. your plan by contrast leaves out almost 10 million americans. so i think that you should really think about what you're saying but be reflective and understand that the people of america want access to health care and do not want cost to be
their barrier to getting it. >> senator harris, thank you. vice president biden, your response? >> the plan no matter how you cut it costs $3 trillion when it is in fact employed. number one. ten years from now, after two terms of the senator being president. after her time. secondly, it will require middle class taxes to go up, not down. thirdly, it will eliminate employer-based insurance. and fourthly, what happens in the meantime? >> i'd like to respond. first of all, the cost of doing nothing is far too expensive. second, we are now paying $3 trillion a year for health care in america. over the next ten years it will probably be $6 trillion. we must act. my plan is immediately allowing people to sign up and get into coverage. we have seniors millions of seniors are going into the
medicare system and getting full coverage and the coverage they need. all people should have access to health care and costs -- >> thank you, senator harris. mayor de blasio, what's your response? >> i don't know what the vice president and senator are talking about. the folks i talk to about health insurance say it isn't working for them. tens of millions of americans don't have health insurance. tens of millions more have health insurance they can barely make work because of the c co-pays, deductibles, premiums, out-of-pocket extensions. there is this mythology somehow all these folks are in love with their insurance in america. what i hear from union workers and hard-working middle class people is they wish they had better insurance and are angry at private insurance companies that skim the profits off the top and make it impossible for eve everyday people to get mental care, dental care. >> thank you, mayor. vice president biden, he said in the past that democrats that want to keep the private insurance industry are defending
a health care system that is not working. what is your response? >> my response is obamacare is working. the way to build this and get to it immediately is to build on obamacare. go back and take back all the things that trump took away, provide a public option, meaning every single person in america would be able to buy another option if they didn't like their employer plan or on medicaid they would automatically be in the plan. i would take place immediately and move quickly and it would ensure the vast, vast, vast majority of americans. in the meantime, what happens? did anybody tell you how much their plans cost? my plans cost $750 billion. that's what it cost. not $30 trillion. >> thank you, mr. vice president. senator gill la braibrand you s medicare for all. who do you think about her calling it medicare for all when it includes a far more significant role for private insurance than the bill you
co-sponsored? >> for the viewers in the audience now are at risk of losing the forest through the trees because the truth is health care in america should be right. when i was a young mother and had theo, he had a reaction to eggs. i had to rush him to the emergency room. my heart is pal pa taounding bem worried his throat will close. i'm not worried about having a credit card in my wallet. i know whatever they will prescribe, i can afford it. the truth about health care in america is today, people cannot afford it. the insurance companies for these plans that rely on insurance companies, i'm sorry, they are for profit. they have an obligation to their shareholders. they pay their ceo millions of dollars. they have to have quarterly profits. they have fat in the system that's real and should be going to health care. let's not lose the forest through the trees and not forget
what the republicans are doing because the truth is republicans and trump, their whole goal is to take away your health care. >> thank you. >> to make it harder for you to afford it even if you have an existing condition. >> your response? >> in response to senator biden about the affordable care aboct it's important you understand our medicare for all plan has actually by the architect of the obama affordable care act been described as one of the most effective ways to bring health care to all. kathleen endorsed our plan as being something that will get us to where we need to go. in terms of the point senator gill gillibrand is raising, i couldn't agree more. they will companies to remain in status quo and that will be about jacking up co-pays, jacking up deductibles -- >> thank you senator harris -- >> have to come out $5,000. >> my plan makes a limit of co-pay to be $1,000.
because we further support the ability to buy into the obamacare plan. secondly, the idea that this is somehow a bad idea, no one has to keep their private insurance but if they would like their insurance, they should be able to keep it. nothing is demanded there be private insurance. it says if the 160 million people who have it say they like their employer insurance, they should have a right to have it. if they don't, they can buy into the biden plan, which is obamacare -- >> thank you, mr. vice president. thank you. senator booker, let me bring you in here. you say you support medicare for all. you also say you are not going to pull private health insurance from more than 150 million americans in exchange for a government plan, but that's what medicare for all would do. so how do you square that? >> first of all, let me say that the person that's enjoying this debate most right now is donald trump. we pit democrats against each
other while he is working right now to take away americans' health care. there is a court case working through the system that will gut the affordable care act and actually get for preexisting conditions. i was raised by two civil rights parents that told me to always keep your eye on the prize and that is in the united states of america, every democrat should stand with the belief that every one should have access to health care, that it's a human right. how we get there, it has to be to end this broken system because we are on our way in a hand full of years of literally spending 20% of our economy, one out of every $5 spent on health care and we spent more in every other nation on everything from mris to insulin drugs, multiple more than other countries. you know what i'm going to do? i'll work to get to a point where medicare for all where everyone is covered but this pitting against progressives against moderates, saying one is
unrealistic and the other doesn't care enough thanks to me is dividing a party and demoralizing us in face of the real enemy here. >> thank you, senator. >> i'll keep fighting for that. >> thank you senator booker. >> congressman gabbard, what is your response? >> we don't have a health care system. we have a sick care system. there are far too many people that are sick and unable to get the care they need because they cannot afford it. so the core of this problem is the fact that big insurance companies and big pharmaceutical companies profiting off the backs of sick people had a seat at the table writing this legislation. kamala harris talked about kathleen that helped write her bill. sibilus works for a company that stands to profit under her plan. if we're seeking to reform the health care system, we have to shutout big insurance and pharma
say they cannot be on the backs of those sick people in the country that are in desperate need of care. >> unfortunately, representative gabbard got it wrong. she did not write my plan, she endorsed it. and when we talk about this again, i'm going to go back to vice president biden because your plan does not cover everyone in america by your staffs and your own definition. 10 million people, as many as 10 million people will not have access to health care, and in 2019 in america, for a democrat to be running for president with a plan that does not cover everyone, i think is without excuse. our plan covers -- >> thank you, senator. >> and gives people choice. >> vice president biden, your response. >> the plan does cover everyone, number one. number two, my plan calls for
controlling drug prices. the biopharma is where things will go. it's about the breakthroughs with the whole -- excuse me, immune system. what we have to do now is we have to have a form that sits in the hhs and says as you develop a drug, you got to come to us and decide what you can sell it for. we will set the price and secondly, it says that you cannot raise that price beyond the cost of inflation from this point on. >> thank you, mr. vice president. >> i want to bring in senator bennett. last night on this stage one of your rivals suggested running on medicare for all would get donald trump reelected. do you agree with that, sir? >> i agree it makes it much more likely. unlike others on this stage i've been crystal clear where i've been through a decade through two tough races in colorado. i believe we should finish the job we started with the affordable care act with a public auction that gives everybody in this aud yeience a
chance to pick for their family if they want private or public insurance and requires drug companies to be negotiated with by medicare and provides competition. that is totally different from the plan that senator warren and senator sanders and senator harris have proposed which would make illegal employer-based health insurance in this country and massively raise taxes on the middle class to the tune of $30 trillion as joe biden said. we don't need to do that. it doesn't make sense for us to take away insurance from half the people in this room and put huge taxes on almost everybody in this room when we can pass a public option, trust the american people to make the right decision and have universal health care in this country in two years, not ten years. >> thank you, secretary kals str -- castro, i i'll come to you afte
secretary castro. >> i know this is personal for all americans. i grew up with a grandmother with diabetes and watched her condition get worse and worse. that whole time she had medicare. i want to strengthen it for those on it and expand it for anybody who wants it. i believe if somebody has a private health insurance plan that is strong that they want to hold on to, they should be able to do that. i don't believe the profit model should ever determine in our great nation whether somebody gets health care or not. >> thank you, secretary castro. senator harris, senator bennett suggested you support banning employer-based health insurance. is that true? >> first of all, with all due respect to my friend michael bennett, my plan does not offer anything that is illegal. what it does is it separates the employer from health care meaning that where you work will not be -- the kind of health care you get will not be a function of where you work. i have met so many americans who stick to a job that they do not like where they are not prospering simply because they
need the health care that employer provides. it's time that we separate employers from the kind of health care people and under my plan, we do that. as it relates to the insurance and pharmaceutical companies -- >> thank you, senator. >> -- who will not be called in and taken to task by senator biden ors -- >> thank you, senator. >> we will do that. >> senator. >> i have to say if we can't admit, if we can't admit tonight what's in the plan, which is banning employer-based insurance, we won't be able to admit that when donald trump is accusing democrats of doing that, as well. we need to be honest about what is in this plan. it bans employer-based insurance and taxes the middle class to the tune of $30 trillion. do you know how much that? that is 70% of what the government will collect in taxes over the next ten years. >> thank you, senator. >> we don't need to do that. >> i do want to -- health care
. >> i wanted to bring in senator harris because he suggested you are not being honest. >> we cannot keep with the republican talking points on this. you got to stop. the reality is that under my medicare for all plan, yes, employers are not going to be able to dictate the kind of health care that their employees get. they will be able to make that decision. private insurance companies and private carriers if they compile by our rules and play by our rules will be able to offer those employees health care coverage under a private medicare plan or they can have the option of a public medicare plan but it is misleading to suggest that employees want what their employer is offering only. they want choice and my plan gives that to them. >> thank you, senator. governor inslee, i want to bring you in. you signed a public option into law that allows washington state residents to purchase a state-backed plan if they want to but this may only save families in washington state as little as 5% off premiums.
is 5% really the kind of relief that the american people need? >> no, we need universal coverage and i'm proud of our state that has done less squabbling in getting things done and i'm proud we're the first state to offer a publicly sanctioned offer of health care to our citizens. i'm also proud that we didn't stop there. we're also the first state that has taken care of our ld elders our seniors. we have a looming retirement wave coming up. i'm proud our state made them eligible to retire in dignity. i'm also proud of this. i think we need to talk more about this as democrats. it is time to give people adequate mental health care in this country and we are -- [ applause ] >> we are having some success in integrating mental health with physical health. there is no reason to distinguish between physiological and mental health. the last think we're doing and i
think is instructive for the nation, we know we're being eaten alive by pharmaceutical cost. we have the most innovative way to drive down pharmaceuticals for life-saving medications in the united states. that's a record of washington state i'd like to take to washington d.c. >> mr. yang, i want to bring you in. you support medicare for all system. how do you respond to governor inslee? >> i want to share a story. when i told my wife i was running for president. my wife said what will we do for health care? democrats are talking about health care in the wrong way. as someone who has run a business, i can tell you flat out our current health care system makes it harder to hire, makes it harder to treat people well and give them benefits and makes it harder to switch jobs as senator harris says and harder to start a business. if we say look, we'll get health care off the backs of businesses and families, then watch american entrepreneur ship recover in blue. that's the argument we should be making to the american people. >> thank you, mr. yang.
mayor de blasio. >> i don't want why democrats on this stage are fear mongering about universal health care. it makes no sense. ask the american people, they are sick of what the pharmaceutical companies are doing to them. ask them what they feel about health insurance companies. they feel it's holding back their families. they get a lot of noes. not a lot of help. why are we not going to be the party that does something bold and says we don't need to be dependant on private insurance. we can have a system that covers everyone. you know what? donald trump won this state of michigan by saying he was going to disrupt the status quo. how about we be the party that's going to disrupt the status quo for working people. >> thank you, mr. mayor, a 15-second point of clarification, who are you talking about? who is fear mongering? >> senator bennett is saying is absolutely inaccurate about taxes. americans right now are paying so much money for their health care, ask people about the reality of premiums, deductibles, co-pays,
out-of-pocket exexpenses. that's worse than any tax and people are paying that now. >> thank you. >> this is -- this has nothing to do with republican talking points or the pharmaceutical industry. this has to do with having faith in the american people they can make the right decisions for their families, and they can choose a public option. bernie sanders who said last night he wrote the bill and did just like i wrote the public option bill is the guy who says it will cost $32 trillion and that we're going to have to raise those taxes to pay for it. he says that. republicans don't say it. don't try to district from the truth -- >> thank you, senator. >> you can't hide from the truth. >> i want to let mayor deplas owe. >> senator, if we as democrats say we're done with private insurances, only hurt the american people in so many ways, we're going to give them something that works for their family's full coverage they can depend on. if we say that, then there is an election. the american people get to
decide, the ultimate choice senator is an election and this should be the party that stands for universal health care and says we're not going to accept anything else. right now in america so many people don't have the health care they need. that is a fact. tens of millions of people including middle class people. give them a chance -- >> thank you, mr. mayor. vice president biden your response, sir? >> the republicans are trying to kill obamacare. obamacare took care of 20 million people off the bat. 100 million people with preexisting conditions and what we got is a public option that in fact would allow anybody to buy in, no one has to keep their private insurance. they can buy into this plan and they can buy into it with $1,000 deductible and never have to pay more than 8.5% of their income when they do it and if they don't have any money, they will get in free. so this idea is a bunch of malarky we're talking about here. the fact of the matter is, there will be a deductible on their paycheck. bernie acknowledges it.
$30 trillion has to ultimately be paid and i don't know what math you do in new york, i don't know what math you do in california but i tell ya, that's a lot of money and there will be a deductible. the deductible will be out of your paycheck because that's what will be required. >> senator harris, i want to bring you in. your response? >> yeah, let's talk about math. let's talk about the fact that the pharmaceutical companies and the insurance companies last year alone profited 7 $2 billion on the backs of american families and understand you are your plan, status quo, you do nothing to hold the insurance companies to task for what they have been doing to american families and america today, a diabetes patient, one in four cannot afford their insulin. in america today -- >> thank you, senator. >> for those who have overdosed from an opioid, there is a
syringe that cost $4,000 that will save their life. it's immoral -- >> thank you, senator. >> vice president biden,of thes who oppose my plan in jail for the nine billion opioids they sell out there. they're misrepresenting to the american people what needs to be done. and the deal is, let's figure out how this works. we immediately are able to cover everybody who wants to get off of their insurance plan they don't like, no matter what one it is, and buy into a medicare option. and they can buy the gold plan and they're not -- anyway -- >> thank you, mr. vice president. let's move now to immigration. secretary castro, president trump's homeland security
secretary says that is a public declaration that the border is effectively open to all. how is he wrong? >> thank you for that question. you know, if you'll elect me president, you're not electing me to follow. you're electing me to lead. and open borders is a right-wing talking point and frankly i'm disappointed that some folks, including some folks on the stage, have taken the bait. the only way that we're going to guarantee that we don't have family separations in this country again is to repeal section 1325 of the immigration nationality act. that's the law that this administration is using to incarcerate migrant parents and physically separate them from their children. my plan would make sure that we put undocumented immigrants on a pathway to citizenship, that we
do a 21st century marshal plan with countries so we can get to the root of this challenge so people can find safety and opportunity at home instead of having to come to the united states. that's how we can be smarter, more effective and more humane when it comes to immigration policy. >> senator bennet, what's your response? >> i disagree that we should decriminalize our border. this is personal for my. my mom is an immigrant and she was separated from her parents during the holocaust in poland. for those reasons, i was part of the gang of eight that wrote -- i wrote the immigration bill in 2013 with john mccain that passed the senate with 68 votes that gave a pathway to citizenship for the 11 million undocumented people who are here. that would pass the most progressive dream act that had ever been conceived and had
$46 billion of border security. every single democrat voted for that bill and a lot of republicans. that should be our position. >> thank you, senator. >> that is our position as democrats. >> senator harris, you indicated that you don't think it should be a criminal offense to cross the u.s. border illegally. how do you respond to senator bennet? >> with all due respect, i went to a place in florida called homestead, and there's a private detention facility being paid for by your taxpayer dollars that houses 2,700 children. and by the way, there were members of us, julian was there, members of congress, they would not let us enter the place, members of the united states congress. so i walked down the road, i climbed a ladder and i looked over the fence. i saw children lined up single file being walked into the
barracks. >> thank you, senator. >> these children have not committed crimes and should not be treated like criminals. >> senator bennet, what's your response? [ applause ] >> i think this is one in the end that we agree with. there's not a single person on this stage if were president would ever separate a child from their parents at the border. and that is what this -- [ applause ] >> that is what this administration has done in the american people's name, they have turned our border into a symbol of hostility, the symbol of this country before donald trump was president was the statue of liberty. that should be the symbol of the united states of america. >> senator gillibrand, what's your response? >> when you talk about whether this should be a crime, you have to remember who we're talking about. when i was at the texas border, i visited with women who had
fled violence, a woman from el salvador owned a small business, gangs said if you don't give us all of your money, we're going to kill your family. another woman was raped, that's why she fled. this is who we're talking about and they're not criminals. i believe we should have a civil violation, no president before president trump enforced the law in the way he has enforced it because he's using it as the crutch to lock up women and children, to separate mothers and babies, to put them behind bars. so i don't think we should have a law on the books that can be so misused. it should be a civil violation and we should make sure that we treat people humanely. >> thank you, senator. vice president biden, in the first two years of the obama administration, nearly 800,000 immigrants were deported. would the higher deportation numbers resume if you were
president? >> absolutely not. i found that the secretary, we sat together in many meetings, i never heard him talk about any of this when he was the secretary. >> please be respectful in the crowd. please continue, mr. vice president. >> the fact is, the fact is -- i don't know if you can hear. i can hear. >> we can hear fine, mr. vice president. >> what the senator from new york talked about is seeking asylum. the women she spoke to are entitled to asylum. that is not crossing the border illegally. what we should do is flood the zone to make sure that we have people to make those decisions quickly. with regard to the secretary's point, i already proposed and
passed $750 million for guatemala, el salvador and honduras to be able to change the circumstance why people fled in the first place. we're in a circumstance where if you say you can just cross the border, what do you say to all of those people around the world who want the want the same thing to come to the united states and make the case, that they have to wait in line. the fact of the matter is, you should be able to -- if you cross the border illegally, you should be able to be sent back. it's a crime. it's a crime and it's not one that in fact -- >> thank you, mr. vice president. secretary castro, your response? >> it looks like one of us has learned from the lessons of the past and one of us hasn't. [ applause ] >> let me start out by answering that question. my immigration plan would fix the broken legal immigration system because we do have a problem with that. >> i agree. >> secondly, the only way that we're going to guarantee that
these kinds of family separations don't happen in the future is that we need to repeal this law. there's still going to be consequences if somebody crosses the border. it's a civil action. also we have 654 miles of fencing. we have thousands of personnel at the border. we have planes, we have boats, helicopters, we have security cameras -- >> thank you. your time is up. >> we need to have some guts on this issue. >> your response. >> i have guts enough to say his plan doesn't make sense. the fact of the matter is, when people cross the border illegally, it is illegal to do it unless they're seeking asylum. people should have to get in line. that's the problem. and the only reason this particular part of the law is being abused is because of donald trump. we should defeat donald trump and end this practice. [ applause ] >> thank you.
congresswoman gabbard, what's your response? >> our hearts break when we see these children at the detention facilities, when we see human beings crowded into cages in abhorrent, inhumane conditions. this is about leadership and understanding that we can and should have both secure borders as well as humane immigration policies. we will have to stop separating children from their parents. make it so it's easier for people to seek asylum in this country. make sure we are securing our borders and making it so people are able to use our legal immigration system by reforming those laws. >> mr. yang, your response. >> i'm the son of immigrants myself. my father immigrated here and generated over 65 u.s. patents for ge and ibm. that's the immigration story we need to be telling. we can't always been focusing on some of the distressed stories. if you go to a factory here in
michigan, you will not find wall to wall immigrants, you will find wall to wall machines. immigrants are being scapegoated for something they have nothing to do with. >> you have a plan that would eliminate immigration detention. does that mean that the roughly 55,000 managements would be released into the united states. >> first of all, we are playing into republican hands who have a very different view and are trying to divide us against each other. i'm listening to the language of my colleagues. no, mr. vice president, we are not going to let people cross the border. an unlawful crossing is an unlawful crossing if you do in the civil courts or the criminal courts. the criminal courts is giving donald trump the ability to violate the human rights of people coming to our country. they're human rights. and so doing it through the civil courts means you won't need these awful detention
facilities that i've been to seeing children sleeping on pavement, people being put in cages, nursing mothers, small children. this is not necessary. we have seen using the civil system piloted programs that have 100% compliance with the civil courts where people are evaluated. if they have no reason to be here, they are returned. if they are, like the people i met who were survivors of sexual assault, who we wouldn't even let come and present for asylum. we are butchering our values and making ourselves less safe. >> mr. vice president, your response? >> i agree with you senator. the asylum process is a real process and this president is ruining it. number two, we should in fact and we have proposed and tried to get past in your administration significantly increasing the number of legal immigrants who are able to come. this country can tolerate a heck of a lot more people.
and the reason we're the country we are, is because we've been able to cherry pick from the best of every culture. it took courage, resilience, confidence for them to come and we should be encouraging people. and by the way, anybody who crosses the stage with a ph.d., should get a green card for seven years. we should keep them here. >> thank you, very much, mr. vice president. governor inslee, what's your response? >> i think we're missing two central statements we should to make. we can no longer allow a white nationalist to be in the white house, number one. and number two -- [ applause ] >> number two, we have to make america what it's always been, a place of refuge. we got to boost the number of people we accept. i'm proud to have been the first governor to stand up against donald trump's muslim ban. i'm proud to have sued him 21
times. i'm ready for november 2020. >> mayor de blasio, your response. >> it's all kind of a charade because there's 11 million people here and everyone in theory has broken the law, but they're part of our communities now, they're part of our economy, they're our neighbors. why are we even discussing on one level whether it's a civil penalty or a criminal penalty when it's an american reality. and what we need is comprehensive immigration reform once and for all to fix it. second, vice president biden, i didn't hear your response when the issue came up of all those deportations. you were vice president of the united states. i didn't hear whether you tried to stop them or not using your power in the white house. did you think it was a good idea or something that needed to be stopped. >> the president came up with the idea of dealing with the dreamers. he put that in the law. he talked about a comprehensive plan which he put on -- laid before the congress saying that we should find a pathway to
citizenship for people. he should we should up the number of people that we're able to bring into this country. lastly, he also pointed out that we should go to the source of the problem and fix it where people were leaving in the first place. he did -- compare him to donald trump, i think is absolutely bizarre. >> thank you very much. congresswoman gabbard, you're a cosponsor for the college for all which would make public colleges and universities free-for-all americans. one of the authors of that plan believes college should be tuition free for undocumented students as well. do you agree? >> i don't. i think we should look at the millions of undocumented immigrants in this country who have been suffering as they've been living in the shadows. and we should fix our legal immigration system to provide them with that pathway to citizenship so they're no longer treated as second-class citizens
in this country. we've got to look at the challenge that people all across this country are facing under crushing student debt. this is something that's impacting my generation in a huge way and i believe that it is our generation that has the bold, creative solutions to be able to solve it. this is about promise for our future. and we've got to make those kinds of investments. >> thank you. mayor de blasio, what's your response? >> i agree with the congress member, but i don't hear a answer from the vice president. i'm confused. i asked the vice president if he used his power to stop those deportations. if you want to be president of the united states, you need to be able to answer the tough questions. i guarantee you, if you're debating donald trump, he's not going to let you off the hook. did you say those deportations were a good idea or did you go to the president and say this is a mistake, we shouldn't do it? which one. >> i was vice president. i'm not the president. i keep my recommendation in private. unlike you, i expect you would go ahead and say whatever was
said privately. that is not what i do. what i do say to you is, he moved to fundamentally change the system. that's what he did. that's what he did. but much more has to be done, much more has to be done -- >> i still don't have an answer. >> first of all, you can't have it both ways. you invoke president obama more than anybody in this campaign. you can't do it when it's convenient and dodge it when it's not. and the second thing, and this irks me. if you got a ph.d., you can come right into this country. that's playing into what the republicans want, to pit some immigrants against some immigrants. some are from shit hole countries. we need to be the country that says everyone has worth and dignity and this should be a country that honors everyone. don't let the republicans divide this party against itself. >> senator, thank you. mr. vice president, your response? >> that's what i said about this
country. we are a country of immigrants. all of us. all of us. some here came against their will. others came because they in fact thought they could fundamentally change their lives and they did. that's what made us great. and the fact of the matter is, i think the president of the united states, barack obama, went out of his way to try to change the system and he got pushed back significantly. >> senator gillibrand, what's your response? >> um -- [ laughter ] >> again, president trump, under his administration, seven children died in his custody. under his administration, families have been torn apart. this party is talking about real ideas for the future. we're talking about what we will do to change america. but we must not forget about our values. we used to believe in this country you should treat others the way you want to be treated. we used to believe in this country we should care about the
least among us. let's remind the american people who we are, why we are democrats and why we're running for president. >> thank you very much. the debate will be right back right after this short break. [ applause ] no flights. no roads. we're trying to figure out what animals are being affected. galápagos is a really challenging place to work. el niño is starting to go haywire. everywhere is going to get touched by climate change. at "the manor" hunting [ cheeis not just a sport. it is a five star boutique experience. where you'll come face to face with game unlike any other. the bond. the thrill. the memories. join us for the ultimate human experience.
[ gunshot ] [ cheerful music playing ] ♪ ♪ mmm, exactly!ug liberty mutual customizes your car insurance, so you only pay for what you need. nice! but uh, what's up with your partner? oh! we just spend all day telling everyone how we customize car insurance because no two people are alike, so... limu gets a little confused when he sees another bird that looks exactly like him.
ya... he'll figure it out. only pay for what you need. ♪ liberty. liberty. liberty. liberty. ♪ [ alarm sound ] [ alarhello.d ] what is happening? what is all of this? move! everybody get out of here! why'd they kidnap bunch of normal folk like us? there's no escape. you have no idea what you're up against. [ screaming ]
here, hello! starts with -hi!mple... how can i help? a data plan for everyone. everyone? everyone. let's send to everyone! [ camera clicking ] wifi up there? -ahhh. sure, why not? how'd he get out?! a camera might figure it out. that was easy! glad i could help. at xfinity, we're here to make life simple. easy. awesome. so come ask, shop, discover at your xfinity store today. ♪
welcome back to the cnn presidential debate. we are live from detroit. i want to turn now to criminal justice, mr. vice president. senator booker called your new criminal justice reform plan, quote, an inadequate solution to what is a raging crisis in our country, unquote. why is senator booker wrong? >> i think he is wrong. i think we should work together. he has a similar plan. we should change the way we look at prisons. when someone is convicted of a drug crime they end up going to jail and to prison. they should be going to rehabilitation. they shouldn't be going to prison. they should be learning to read and write. when they get out of prison, they should be in a situation where they have access to everything they would have had before including pell grants for education, including making sure that they're able to have public housing, including they have all the opportunities that were available to them because we
want them to become better citizens. that's the essence of what my plan lays out. and so i -- you know, i -- anyway, that's what i think my plan -- i know what my plan does and i think it's not dissimilar to what the senator said we should be working together to get things done. >> your response? >> my response is this is a crisis in aur country because we have treated issues of race and poverty and addiction by locking people up and not lifting them up. since the 1970s, every crime bill, major and minor, has had his name on it. and those are your words, not mine. and this is one of those instances where the house was set on fire and you claimed responsibility for those laws. and you can't just now come out with a plan to put out that fire.
we have got to have far more bold action on criminal justice reform. having -- >> thank you, senator. >> having true marijuana justice. which means we legalize it in a federal level and reinvest the -- >> vice president biden, i want to give you a chance to respond. >> the bills that the president -- excuse me, the future president, that the senator is talking about, are bills that were passed years ago and passed overwhelming. since 2007, i, for example, tried to get the crack powder cocaine disparity eliminated. in 2007 you became mayor and you had a police department that you went out and hired rudy giuliani's guy and you engaged in stop and frisk. you had 75% of those stops reviewed as illegal, the justice department came after you for
saying you were engaging in behavior that was inappropriate, and then in fact nothing happened. the entire time you were mayor. >> senator booker, would you want to respond? >> i'm glad he endorsed my presidency already. it's no secret i hired a police department with problems and challenges. but the head of the aclu has already said that i put forth national accountability. mr. vice president, i didn't interrupt you. please have respect, sir. we have a system right now that's broken. and if you want to compare records and i'm shocked that you do, i am happy to do that. because all the problems that he is talking about that he created, i actually led the bill that got passed into law that reverses the damages that your bills that you were bragging calling it the biden crime bill up until 2015. >> thank you, senator.
>> the bill that he talks about is a bill in our administration we passed. that's the bill that passed. and the fact of the matter is, secondly, there is nothing done for the entire eight years he was mayor, there was nothing done to deal with the police department that was corrupt. why did you announce on the first day a zero tolerance policy of stop and frisk and hire rudy giuliani's guy in 2007 when i was trying to get rid of the -- >> there's a saying in my community that you're dipping into the kool-aid and you don't even know the flavor. you need to come to the city and see the reforms we put in place. the head of the aclu said that i embraced reform not just in action but in deeds. you are trying to shift the view from what you created. there are people right now in prison for life, for drug
offenses because you stood up and used that tough on crime phony rhetoric that got a lot of people elected but destroyed communities like mind. this isn't about the past. this is about the present right now. >> thank you, senator. i want to bring in secretary -- i want to bring in secretary castro, your response, sir? >> i agree with senator booker that a lot of what vice president helped author in '94 was a mistake. and he's flip-flopped on these things. there are a lot of things we can talk about, sentencing reform, investing in public defenders, i'm proud that i'm the only candidate that has put forward a police reform plan. because we have a system that is broken and we need to fix it. whether it's the case of someone like michael brown, or eric
garner where the justice department decided not to pursue challenges, we need to have a standard and that we end qualified immunity for police officers so we can hold them accountable. >> i want to bring in -- i want to bring in governor inslee. your response? >> i suggest that people come out to the state of washington and see what criminal justice reform looks like. i'm proud that i was the first governor to offer pardons to thousands of people with drug crimes. we've eliminated the death penalty. and importantly, we've done this, when people come out of the legal system and they've done their responsibility to the citizens, we need to make sure they can get a job. we have been the box so people can get a job when they come out. and i got to argue with my friend, secretary castro, we haven't put forward a plan, we have adopted probably one of the best police accountability measures and trainer police
officers in deescalation techniques so we have less violence. >> secretary castro, your response? >> it's much more that. this was a great example, the other day, the department of justice not going after the officer that -- the officer used a choke hold that was prohibited by nypd. he did that 11 different times eric garner said he couldn't breathe. he knew what he was doing and yet he has not been brought to justice. that police officer should be off the street. >> mayor de blasio? mayor de blasio, why is that police officer still on the force, the one who killed eric garner. please respond? >> i know the garner family, they've gone through extraordinary pain. they're waiting for justice and they're going to get justice. there's going to be justice. i have confidence in that. in the next 30 days in new york, you know why, because for the
first time we are not waiting on the federal justice department which told the city of new york that we could not proceed because the justice department was pursuing their prosecution. and years went by and a lot of the pain accrued. and what i'm working on there will never be another tragedy because we're changing fundamentally how we police. there's one last thing i have to say about the justice department. the vice president for 2 1/2 of those years, mr. vice president, tell us what did you do to try and spur on the justice department to act in the garner case? >> thank you, mayor de blasio. you can response to that. >> number one, we made sure we reduced the federal prison population by 38,000 people, number one. number two, we insisted that we change the roles that police engage in. we provided for body cameras, we made sure there were a lot of
things that were changed in the process. 38,000 people in the federal system were released under the system. and so the fact is, that there's a lot we've done. here's the deal, the fact is that we're talking about things that occurred a long, long time ago and now all of a sudden, you know -- i find it fascinating, everybody is talking about how terrible i am on these issues. barack obama knew exactly who i was. he had ten lawyers do a background check and everything about me on civil rights and he chose me and said it was the best decision he ever made. >> your response? >> i speak for just about anyone watching that i would trust anyone on this stage more than i trust our president trump. we have to focus on beating donald trump in 2020. i want to share a story that a prison guard in new hampshire said to me. he should we should pay people to stay out of jail because we spend so much when they're behind bars.
right now we think we're saving money, we end up spending the money in dark ways. we should put money directly into people's hands after prison and before they go into prison. >> you heard earlier mayor de blasio respond to secretary castro on the question of why the police officer who killed eric garner is still on the nypd. was that response adequate? >> no. he should be fired. he should be fired now. [ applause ] >> i sat down with eric garner's mother and i can tell you when you've lost your son, when he begged for breath, when you know because you have a video, when you know he said i can't breathe so many times over and over again, when you know he used an illegal choke hold, that person should be fired and as -- if i was the mayor i would fire him. but as president, i would make sure that we had a full investigation, that the report would be made public. if i wasn't satisfied, we have
have a decree. >> senator harris, you have been quite critical of vice president biden's policies on race, specifically on the issues of bussing in the 1970s, having benefitted from bussing when you were a young child. vice president biden says your current position on bussing, that that position is the same as his position. is he right? >> that is simply false. and let's be very clear about this, when vice president biden was in the united states senate working with segregationists to oppose bussing which was the vehicle by which we would integrate america's public schools, had i been in the senate at that time i would have been on the other side of the aisle. had those segregationists their way, i would not be a member of the united states senate, cory booker would not be a member of
the united states senate and president obama would not have been in a position to nominate him to the place he holds. on that issue, we could not be more apart. the vice president has still failed to acknowledge that it was wrong to take the position that he took at that time. now, i would like to talk about this conversation about eric garner because i too met with his mother. one of the things we got to be clear about, this president of the united states, donald trump, while he has been in office, has quietly been allowing the united states d.epartment of justice t stop investigations -- >> thank you -- >> this is important. the civil rights department of justice said charges should have been filed but this united states department of justice usurped and i believe it is pea because that president didn't want those charges to go
forward. under my administration, the civil rights division will reign rein and there will be an independent investigation. >> when senator harris was the attorney general for eight years in the state of california, there were two of the most segregated school districts in the country, in los angeles and in san francisco. and she did not -- i didn't see a single time she brought a case against them to desegregate them. she's also in a situation where she had a police department when she was there that in fact was abusing people's rights and the fact was that she in fact was told by her own people that her own staff, that she should do something about and disclose to defense attorneys like me that you in fact have been -- the police officer did something that did not give you information that would help your client. she didn't do that. she never did it. what happened, along came a federal judge and said enough
and he freed 1,000 of these people. if you doubt me, google, 1,000 prisoners freed, kamala harris. >> your response? >> that is simply not true. and as attorney general of california where i ran the second largest department of justice in the united states, i am proud of the work we did. work that has received national recognition for what has been the important work of reforming a criminal justice system and cleaning up the consequences of the bills that you passed when you were in the united states senate for decades. it was the work of creating the -- one of the first in the nation initiates around re-entering former offenders and getting them jobs and -- >> thank you senator. i want to bring in congresswoman gabbard. you took issue with senator harris confronting vice president biden at the last debate, you called it a false
accusation that the vice president is a racist. >> i want to bring the conversation back to the criminal justice system that is disproportionately affecting black and brown people. i'm concerned about this record of senator harris. she put over 1,500 people in jail for marijuana violations and laughed about it when she was asked if she ever smoked marijuana. [ applause ] >> she blocked evidence that would have freed an innocent man from death row. she kept people in prison beyond their sentences to use them as cheap labor for the state of california, and she fought to keep cash bail system in place that impacts poor people in the worst kind of way. >> senator harris, your response? [ applause ] >> as the elected attorney general of california, i did the
work of significantly reforming the criminal justice system of the state of 40 million people which became a national model for the work that needs to be done. and i am proud of that work. and i am proud of making a decision to not just give fancy speeches or be in a legislative body and give speeches on the floor but doing the work of being in the position to use the power that i had to reform a system that is badly in need of reform. that is why we created initiatives that were about re-entering form offenders and getting them counseling. that's why i'm an advocate for what we need to do to not only decriminalize marijuana -- >> i want to bring congresswoman gabbard back in. >> when you were in a position to make a difference and an impact in these people's lives, you did not and worse yet in the case of those who are on death row, you blocked evidence from being revealed that would have
freed them until you were forced to do so. there's no excuse for that and the people who suffered under your reign as prosecutor, you owe them an apology. >> senator harris? >> my entire career, i have been personally opposed to the death penalty and that has never changed and i dare anybody who's in a position to make that decision to face the people i have faced to say i will not seek the death penalty. that the my background, that is my work. i am proud of it. i think you can judge people by when they are under fire and it's not about some fancy opinion on a stage but when they're in the position to actually make a decision what do they do, when i was in the position of having to decide whether or not to seek a death penalty on cases i prosecuted, i made a very difficult decision that was not popular to not seek the death penalty. history shows that and i am proud of those decisions. >> thank you very much. senator bennet, why are you the best candidate to heal the
racial divide that exists in this country today which has been stoked by the president's racist rhetoric. >> the president's racist rhetoric should be enough grounds for everybody in this country to vote him out of office. that one thing alone, should be enough. second, don, i want to answer your question by tagging on the conversation we were just having. this is the fourth debate that we have had and the second time that we have been debating what people did 50 years ago with bussing when our schools are as segregated as they were 50 years ago. we need a conversation about what's happening now and when there's a group of kids in this country that don't get preschool through no fault of their own and another group does, equal is not equal. and we've got a group of k-12 schools that are good because families can spend a million bucks and you got the detroit public schools that are as segregated as they were. equal is not equal. [ applause ]
>> and let me tell you something else, don, i believe you can draw a straight line from slavery through jim crow, through the banking, to the mass incarceration that they were talking on this stage a few minutes ago. but under what other line i can draw, 88% of the people in our prisons dropped out of high school. let's fix our school system and maybe we can fix the prison crisis that we have. >> thank you. governor inslee, what's your response? [ applause ] >> governor inslee, please respond. >> you know, i approach this question with humility because i have not experienced what many americans have. i've never been a black teenager pulled over in a white neighborhood. i've never been a woman talked over in a meeting. i've never been an lgbtq member
subject to a slur. and so i have believed i have an added responsibility, a double responsibility to deal with racial disparity. and we've talked about the way we do it including ending the school to prison pipeline in my state. but i want to say this. this is a common error that every single senator on this stage, as much as i respect them all, they all have an enormous error which is going to prevent our party from making any progressive progress in the united states and it is this: we are all going to work like the dickens to get more democrats elected to the senate. if we get a majority in the u.s. senate because of the position of these senators, not a damn thing is going to get done. and i'll tell you why, with all their good intentions, and i know their sincere and passionate, but because they
embraced the filibuster, mitch mcconnell is going to run the u.s. senate even if we take a marke majority. we got to get rid of the filibuster. >> mr. yang, why are you the best candidate to heal the racial divide in this country? >> i spent seven years creating a non-profit that created thousands of jobs and i saw that the racial disparities are much, much worse than i had ever imagined. a study just came out that projected the average african-american net worth will be zero by 2030. how is that possible? it's possible because we're in the greatest economic transformation in our history. artificial intelligence is coming, it's going to displace workers, truck drivers. and you know who suffers most in a natural disaster, people of color, people who have lower
levels of capital. what are we going to do about it? we should go back to the writings of martin luther king who in 1967 said we need a guaranteed minimum income in the united states of america. that is the most effective way for us to address racial inequality in a genuine way and give every american a chance in the 21st century economy. >> thank you very much. secretary castro, after the president's racist tweets attacking baltimore, the mayor of baltimore slammed the tweets and said to the president, help us, send the resources that we need to rebuild america. so what would you do for baltimore and other cities that need help? >> first of all, the president is a racist and that was just one more example of it. we know that whether it's baltimore or cities like detroit, they're tremendously rich in history and culture and also in possibility. here's what i would do if i'm president, i would invest in tremendous educational
opportunity, invest in universal pre-k, improving k through 12 education and making higher education available to everyone through tuition-free state universities, community colleges. i would follow up on the work that i did at hud. we passed the most sweeping rule to further desegregate our communities in the united states. this trump administration set that back. i would put that back in order. i would also invest in housing that is affordable because folks know that the rent is going through the roof and we need to make sure that you don't have to get out of west baltimore or inner city detroit or the west side of san antonio or anywhere if you want to reach your american dream. i want you to be able to accomplish anywhere you are. >> senator gillibrand, what's your response? >> i don't believe it's the responsibility of corey and
camera la to take this on. i think as a white woman running for president of the united states, it is my responsibility to lift up those voices that aren't being listened to. and i can talk to those white women in the suburbs and explain to them what white privilege is. when their son is walking down the street wearing a hoodie, his whiteness protects him from not being shot. when his -- when her -- when their child has a car that breaks down and he knocks on someone's door for help and the door opens and the help is given, it's his whiteness that protects him from being shot. that's what white privilege in america is today. my responsibility is to not only lift up those stories but explain to communities across america, like i did in youngstown, ohio, to a young mother, that this is all of our responsibility. and together we can make this community stronger. >> let's now turn to the issue
of the climate crisis. the united nations says all carbon issues needs to be cut by 2050. many of your fellow democratic candidates say climate change is the biggest existential threat facing the country. you, though, are calling it the number one priority in your campaign. what do you know that the others don't? >> well, i know the firsthand, terrific impact of climate change on americans already. the family that i saw with their aluminum home, they lost everything in the paradise fires, the non-profit in davenport, iowa, that was washed away in the floods, we have to act now. look, climate change is not a singular issue, it is all the issues that we democrats care about. it is health, it is national
security. it is our economy. and we know this, middle ground solutions, like the vice president has proposed or sort of average-sized things are not going to save us. too little, too late is too dangerous. and we have to have a bold plan. and mine has been called the gold standard. we also need to embed environmental justice. i was in the detroit neighborhood the other day, right next to an oil refinery where the kids have as ma clusters. it doesn't matter what your color is, you ought to have clean air and water in america. >> vice president biden, governor inslee said your plan is middle ground. >> the fact of the medical benefit is, i call for immediate
action to be taken. first of all, we're responsibility for 15% of all the pollution in the country. here's the deal, in that area, there's also piece, 85% of it is something i helped negotiate and that is the paris climate accord. i would rejoin that accord, i would make sure we up the ante. i would be able to bring those leaders together that i know and convene them in the white house and i would raise the standard. i also invest $400 billion -- >> thank you, sir -- >> in research for new alternatives to deal with -- >> mr. yang, your response. >> the important number in his remarks is the united states is only 15% of global emissions. we like to act as if we're 100%. even if we were to curb or emissions dramatically, the earth is going to get warmer. the last four years have been the four warmest years in
history. we are too late. we are ten years too late. we need to do everything we can to start moving the climate in the right direction but we also need to start moving our people to higher ground and the best way to do that is to put economic resources into your hands so you can protect yourself and your families. >> i was challenged by the vice president. >> go ahead, governor. >> thank you very much. these deadlines are set by science. your argument is not with me, it's with science. and unfortunately your plan is just too late. the science tells us we have to get off coal in ten years. your plan does not do that. we have to have off of fossil fuels in 15. your plan does not do that. i've heard you say that we need a realistic plan. here's what i -- >> i didn't say that. >> here's what i believe. i believe that survival is realistic, and that's the kind of plan i need. >> my plan calls for 500,000 charging stations around the country so by 2030 we're all
electric vehicles. my plan calls for making sure that we have $400 billion invested in technologies to learn how to contain what we're doing, creating 10 million new jobs. we will double offshore wind, we will end any subsidies for coal or any other fossil fuel. but we have to also engage the world while we're doing it. we have to walk and chew gum at the same time. [ applause ] >> thank you, vice president. just to clarify, would there be any place for fossil fuels including coal and fracking in a biden administration? >> no. we would work it out. we would make sure it's eliminated and no more subsidies for either one of those. any fossil fuel. >> thank you -- >> we cannot work it out. we cannot work this out. the time is up. our house is on fire. we have to stop using coal in ten years and we need a president to do it or it won't get done. get off coal. save this country and the planet. >> senator harris, your
response? >> i have to agree with governor inslee and i'm going to paraphrase one of your sayings which is we currently have a president in the white house who obviously does not understand the science. he's been pushing science fiction instead of science fact. the guy thinks wind turbines cause cancer but in fact they cause jobs. and the reality is i would take any democrat on this stage over the current president of the united states who is rolling it back to our collective carol. we adopt a green new deal. i would put in place so we would be carbon neural -- >> thank you, senator. you're a cosponsor of the green new deal, paid vacations and retirement security for everyone in america. explain how that's realistic? >> so, the first thing that i'm going to do when i'm president is i'm going to clorox the oval
office. the second thing i'm going to do is i will reengage on global climate change and i will not only sign the paris climate accords, but i will lead a worldwide conversation about the urgency of this crisis. the greatest threat to humanity is global climate change. i visited a family in iowa who water spewed into her home, it tossed her refrigerator up end, all the furniture was broken and mud was everywhere. that is the impact of severe weather right now on families' lives. the truth is, we need a robust solution. when john f. kennedy said i want to pulled a man on the moon in the next ten years not because it's easy, but because it's hard, he knew it was going to be a measure of our innovation, our success. he wanted to have a space race with russia. why not have a green energy race with china? why not have clean air and clean
water for all americans? why not rebuild our infrastructure? why not actually invest in the green jobs. that's what the green new deal is about. i will put a price on carbon to make market forces help us. >> you are not a cosponsor on the green new deal, please respond. >> first of all, this is personal. i grew up in hawaii which is the most remote island chain in the world. for us growing up there protecting our environment was not a political issue, it's a way of life. it's part of our culture. it's part of who we are. this is why as a member of congress, long before there was ever a green new deal, i introduced the most ambitious climate change legislation ever in congress. that laid out an actionable plan to take us from where we are today to transition off of fossil fuels and invest in green energy, invest in workforce training, the kinds of infrastructure that we need to deal with the problems and the challenges that climate is posing to us today.
>> thank you. senator booker, what's your response, is the job guarantee in the green new deal realistic? >> i want to take a step back and say that i agree wholeheartedly with governor inslee. it's one of the reasons green peace ranks at the -- >> close. just close. [ laughter ] >> i want to say very clearly -- thank you, man. thank you. i'll try harder. look, the reason why is because, first of all, this problem didn't start yesterday. science didn't become a reality yesterday. this has been going on for years. there was a another president that would not join an international accord. i was mayor then and i stood up in national leadership joining with other leaders saying climate change is not a separate issue. it must be the issue and the lens with which we view every issue. nobody should get applause for rejoining the paris climate
accords. that is kindergarten. we need to make sure everything from our trade deals, everybody must be supplemented to the crisis that is existential which is dealing with the climate threat. and the majority of this problem is outside the united states, but the only way we're going to deal with this is if the united states leads. >> mayor de blasio, your administration has come under fire after hundreds of children living in new york city public housing tested positive for elevated levels of lead. we're not far from flint, michigan. how can you assure the people of flint and across the nation that you are the right person to handle such a problem. >> we have a huge problem and it's decades old in new york. we've declared the e rat indication of all lead, ending the notion of led poisoning once
and all and we're doing something about it. lead poisoning has gone down 90% since 2005 and we're going to bring it down to zero because we're going to go into every place, buildings, school, and take out that lead and that needs to be done all over this country. the federal government used to not take any responsibility for our public housing for decades they've been disinvesting in the public housing that was supposed to be a federal responsibility. that's part of why we have this lead crisis to begin with. i'm in charge of the largest city in this nation. you do not accept the status quo. you fix it. and so we're going into every one of those apartments to make sure those children and those families are safe and then we're going to eradicate that lead once and for all. there should be a federal mandate to do the same in every place of this country.
>> why are you the right candidate to solve this problem? >> people don't have to wonder what i would do. i've actually done it. i was secretary of housing and hur urban development during the flint crisis. we improved the standard of how we deal with elevated blood lead levels in children. this is still a major problem out there. i was back in flint about six weeks ago and i released a plan to invest $50 billion so we remove lead as a major public health threat. we need to do it. >> donald trump one independence here in michigan by 16 percentage points which was critical to donald trump's winning the state's 16 electoral votes. there's a big debate within the democratic party about the best way the democrats can win back michigan. vice president biden, last night on this stage, senator elizabeth
warren said we're not going to solve the urgent problems we face with small ideas. we're going to solve them by being the democratic party of big, structural change. what do you say to progressives who worry that your proposals are not ambitious enough to energize the progressive wing of your party which you will need to beat donald trump? >> because we did the. i was asked to manage an $87 billion plan that would be spent in a total of 18 months that revived this state and many others because -- and it kept us out of a depression. with 0.2 of 1% of waste or fraud. and our administration pushed bailing general motors out saving tens of thousands of jobs here in this state. [ applause ] >> number three, i also was asked as the mayor of detroit can tell you by the president of the united states to help detroit get out of bankruptcy
and get back on its feet. i spent better part of two years out here working to make sure that it did exactly that. we invested significantly in this city, when in the state. i suspect that's what the mayor endorsed me. and didn't endorse the senator. >> gillibrand what's your response. >> to the people of michigan, i know exactly how i beat president trump. i have already done it. i took a bus tour to talk about his broken promises here in michigan. he promised no bad trade deals. he didn't have started a trade war with china and another bad trade agreement with nafta 2.0. give away to drug companies in mechanics komexico. telling people he has broken the promises to them. i lifted up their voices and listened to concerns and offered real solutions.
and i have done this before. my first house district i ran in was a two to one republican district. i won it twice. i haven't lost an election since. i can bring people together in red, purple and blue areas. more than that i can get things done. >> mr. yang in poll after poll. democratic voters say a nominee to beat trump is more important than having a nominee who agrees with them on major issues. right now according to to polls the candidate who has the best chance of doing that of beating trump is vice president biden. why are they wrong? >> i'm building a coalition of trump voters, independents and libertarians and democratic and progressive. i'm best to suited to beat trump. how to win in michigan and ohio and pennsylvania, the problem is that so many people feel like the economy has left them behind. what we have to do is say look there's record high gdp and stock market prices and record high suicide, drug over dose,
depression and anxiety. american life expectancy declined for three years. my wife at home with two boys right now. one is autistic. what does her work count as in today's economy. zero. that's the opposite of the truth. it's the most challenging and vital. the way we win the election we redefine economic progress to include the things that matter fot people this michigan and all of us. like our health, well being, mental health, clean air and clean water. how our kids are doing. if we change the measurements for the economy to our own well being we'll win this election. >> congresswoman gabbard your response. >> donald trump won the election because far too many people in the country felt like they have been left behind by both political parties. self-serving politicians on both sides more interested in bipartisan politics than fighting for the people.
i'm speaking the truth. to peek all across the country about the fact that people in flint, michigan are still being left behind and poisoned by the water in the system. because every single month we are spending $4 billion on a continuing war in afghanistan. $4 billion every single month. rather than ending that war bringing our troops home and using those precious resources in to serving the needs of the people here in this country. people in communities like flint. that's the leadership i'll bring. >> senator booker your response. >> i'm grateful, look. this is a time when we're not staring at the truth and calling it out. this is a case for the democratic party the truth will set us free. we lost lt state of michigan. everybody from republicans to russians were targeting the suppression of african american voters. we need to say that. if the african american vote was
four years earlier we would have won michigan. we need campaign ready for what's coming. an all out assault. the highest performing voter group which is black women. i will try to fight against voter suppression and activate and engage voters and coalitions that will win michigan and pennsylvania and wisconsin. >> thank you. senator harris. >> first of all, donl trump came in making a lot of promises to working people that he didn't keep. he was going to help farmers and autoworkers. farmers are looking at bankruptcy. soybeans rotting in bills. autoworkers we dppt perhaps hundreds of thousands will be out of jobs by the end of the year. just dropping the interest rate and admitted why. because of the so called trade policy this president has that has been nothing more than the trump trade tax that is resulted in american families spending as much as $1.4 billion more a
month on everything from shampoo to washing machines. hoe betrayed the american people and families. and he will lose this election because folks are clear. that he has done nothing except try to beat people down and instead of lift people up that's what we want in the next president of the united states. >> thank you. the debate is back after this short break. and here we have another burst pipe in denmark. if you look close... jamie, are there any interesting photos from your trip? ouch, okay.
huh, boring, boring, you don't need to see that. oh, here we go. can you believe my client steig had never heard of a home and auto bundle or that renters could bundle? wait, you're a lawyer? only licensed in stockholm. what is happening? jamie: anyway, game show, kumite, cinderella story. you know karate? no, alan, i practice muay thai, completely different skillset. ♪ ♪
let's go! ♪ so, every day, we put our latest technology and unrivaled network to work. the united states postal service makes more e-commerce deliveries to homes than anyone else in the country.
e-commerce deliveries to homes the mucma fest! of summer... country music's biggest stars perform their hottest hits. and the first time ever. lil nas x, billy ray cyrus and keith urban perform the hit "old town road." cma fest! sunday 87c on abc. and after the show check out a special encore performance of brett young's song, "catch." available only on xfinity. just say "brett young" into your x1 voice remote.
we're back with the cnn democratic presidential debate. we want to turn to the economy. secretary castro. this is for you. wage growth is up. stocks are rising unemployment is near historic lows. incolliding for latin and african americans. you have all out lined plans you in particular that could raise taxes. how can you guarantee that won't hurt the economy? >> first of all, there are a lot of americans that are hurting just go and ask the folks that received notice they're getting laid off by general motors or ask the folks sleeping on the street in big cities and small towns across the united states. or ask fast food workers that i joined a couple weeks ago working for minimum wage and can't provide for families or pay the rent. so, the idea of that america is doing fine is wrong.
this president always likes to take credit like he did this. we have had about 105 straight months of positive job growth the longest streak in american history. 80 months was due to president obama. thank you barack obama. so i believe that we need to invest in what will ensure americans can prosper in the years to come. the knowledge and skill to compete in the 21st century economy. they can afford the rent where they live and they have health care so they don't have to worry about going homeless because they can't afford a medical procedure. >> thank you secretary castro. i want to turn now to a question about trade and for congresswoman gabbard. many saw the trans-pacific partnership issue as something that would be a critical tool to deal with the rise of china. you were against it. how would you ensure that the united states is able to remain competitive against china on the
world stage? sfwl by pushing for fair trade. not trade deals that give away the sovereignty of the american people. and our country. that give away american jobs. and that threaten our environment. these are the three main issues with that mass i have trade deal the trans-pacific partnership. the central one was the fact it gave away our sovereignty to a panel of international corporations who is rulings supersede any domestic law that we would pass. federal law or state or local law. this is extremely dangerous and goes against the values that we have. as a country. speak of the fact it would have a negative impact on domestic jobs and lacked clear protection for our environment. these are the things we have to keep at the forefront as we look to enact fair trade deals with other countries to make sure we continue to be a thriving part of the global economy. >> to be clear, would you keep president trumps tariffs on
china? >> i would not. the approach that president trump has taken has been extremely volatile. without any clear plan. it has a ravaging and devastating effect on manufacturers. on farmers. who are already struggling and failing to see the light of day because of the plan trump has taken. >> vice president would you rejoin the trans-pacific partnership. which president trump withdrew from. >> i would renegotiate. we make up 25% of the world economy. in order china will write the rules on trade or we are. we have to join with the 40% of the world that we have with us and this time make sure there's no one sitting at that table doing the deal unless environmenttists are there and labor is there and make sure we equip workers fers to compete by investing in them now.
to make them womcompetitive. we must have the rest of the world join us to keep nem in check from abusing. >> vice president biden to be clear. would you or would you not rejoin the tpp? >> i would not as it was initially put forward. i would insist that we renegotiate pieces of that with the pacific nations that we had. in south america and north america. to bring them together to hold china accountable for rules of setting the rules of road. how trade should be conducted. otherwise they'll do exactly what they're doing, fill the vacuum and run the table. >> thank you, sir. mayor de blasio you oppose the deal. >> i want it ask the question. president trump is trying to sell nafta 2.0. he has a new name. it's just as dangerous. it will take away american jobs like the old nafta. to michigan. and we cannot have democrats be party to a new nafta.
i believe yoir the only one who voted for the original nafta. are you ready to say you will oppose a new nafta and what you believe in is trade treaties that empower organized labor across the boundaries of the world and give working people power again. not just corporations. >> yes. >> your response, sir. >> yes. >> that's it? >> would i insist that labor be engaged the answer is yes. >> i consider that a victory. >> well, i love your affection for me. you spend a lot of time with me. >> you know what -- we believe in redemption. in this party. >> i tell you what, i hope you're part of it. >> i want to ask senator bennett. cnn reached out to michigan democratic primary voters for the most pressing question. this question. here in detroit the economy has
seen firsthand how technology and automation can displace workers and create uncertainty around human job security. how would you a balance the disruptions with the impact of technology on the economy. >> this goes to the last question. which is how are we going to remain competitive. it's not just about trade. it's about whether we'll invest in the country anymore. since 2001, we have cut $5 trillion worth of taxes almost all of that is gone to the wealthiest people in america. we have made the income inequality worse not better. through the policies of the federal government. we spent $5.6 trillion in the middle east. that is 12 or $13 trillion that from the point of view of driving the economy in michigan, or anywhere else in america, we might as well lit that money on
fire. we have to stop doing that. we need to invest in america again. for the money that we have spent that i just described we could have fixed every road and bridge in the country. we could have fixed every airport that is needs to be fixed. we could have fixed not just flint but every water system in the country. we could have made social security solvent for my children. we did none of it because of self-serving politicians in washington d.c. who voted for deals that were good for them but not for michigan or the american people. >> mr. yang. women on average earn 80 cents for every dollar earned by men. senator harris wants to fine companies that don't close the gap. as an entrepreneur do you think a stiff fine will change how companies pay their female employees? >> i have seen firsthand the
inequity if the business world. women are concerned. particularly in start ups and entrepreneur ship. we have to do more at every step. the obstacles start not just at home but when you seek an a mentor or investor often they don't look like you and might not think your idea is the right one. to fwif women a leg up we have it think about women in every situation including the ones in exploitive and abuses jobs and relationships around the country. the waitress getting harassed by a boss at the diner. who might have a business idea. but is stuck where she is. what we have to do is gif women economic freedom to improve their situations and start businesses and the best way to do this is putting a dividend of $1,000 a month into their hands. it would be a game changer. women do more of the unrecognized and uncompensated work in the society. it will not change unless we change it. >> senator harris your response.
>> i think that's support of my proposal. which is this. since 1963 when we passed the equal pay act we have been talking about the fact women are not paid equally for equal work. fast forward to the year of the 2019. and women are paid 80 cents on the dollar. black women 61 cents. native american woman 58 cents. i'm done with the conversation. so yes, i'm proposing in order to deal with this. i'll require corporations to post on thaer web site whether they with paying women equally. and will be fined for every 1% difference between what they're paying men and women. they will be fined 1% of the previous years profit. that will get attention time for action. >> senator gillibrand. what's your response? will fining companies solve the problem? >> i think we have to have a broader conversation. about whether we value women and whether we want to make sure women have every opportunity in the workplace.
i want to address vice president biden. directly. when the senator was debating middle class afford nlt for child care he wrote an op-ed. he vote against it. he wrote an op-ed he believed that women working outside the home would quote create the deterioration of family. he also said that women who were working outside the home were quote avoiding responsibility. and i just need to understand as a woman who worked my entire career as the primary wage ener and care giver. the my second son is here. and i had him when i was a member of congress. so under vice president biden analysis, am i serving in congress resulting in the deterioration of the family because i had access to quality affordable day care. i want to know what he meant when he sthad. >> that was a long time ago. it would have given people
making today $100,000 a year tax break for child care. i didn't want that. i wanted the child care to go to people making less than $100,000. and that's what it was about. as a single father who raised three children for five years by myself, i have some idea of what it cost. i support making sure that every single solitary person needing child care get an $8,000 tax credit now. that would put 700,000 women back to work increase the gdp by eight tenths of 1%. it's the right thing to do to give tax breaks to corporations for these why can't we do it this way. >> mr. vice president you didn't answer my question. what did you mean when you said when a woman works outside the home it's resulting in quote the deterioration of family. we are avoiding -- these are quotes. the title of the op-ed. that causes concern. we know america's women are working. four out of ten moms have to
work. they are the primary or sole wage earners. they put food on the table. eight out of ten working today. most women have to work to provide for kids. many women want to work to provide for the community. either you don't believe it or today or what did you mean. >> my deceased worked we had children. my present wife worked all the way through raising children. fabt of the matter the situation is one that i don't know what's happened. i wrote the violence against women act. i was deeply involved in making sure the equal pay amendment. and involved on these. i came up with the it's on us proposal. to see women are treated decent on college campuses. you came to syracuse with me and said it was wonderful. i'm passionate about the concern making sure women are treated equally. i don't know what happened except you're running for president. >> i understand -- >> mr. vice president. i respect you deeply.
i respect you. those words are very specific. you said women working outside ot home lead to the deterioration of family. my grandmother worked outside the home. my mother. >> thank you senator gillibrand. >> i want to bring senator harris. >> he no longer believes it sfwl . >> i never believed it. >> talk about running for president you change your position. on the hyde amendment you made a decision for years to with hold resources to poor women to reproductive healthcare and including women who were the victims of rape and incest. do you now say that you have evolved and you regret that? you have been only since you have been running for president this time said you in some way would take that back or didn't agree with the decision you made over many many years. this directly impacted so many
women in our country. and i personally prosecuted rape cases and child molestation. and the experience those women have those children have and would be denied resources, is unacceptable. >> the fact is that senator knows that's not my position. everybody on this stage has been in the congress. and the senator house voted for the hyde amendment. it's in the past it was available because there was other access for those kinds of services. provided privately. once i wrote the legislation making sure that every single woman would have the opportunity to have healthcare paid for by the federal government, everyone. that that could no longer stand. i support a woman's right to choose. i support the constitutional right. i will continue to support it and move as president to see to that the congress legislate that that is the law as well.
>> why did it take you so long to change your position on the amendment? until you were running for president to change your position. >> there was not full federal funding for all reproductive services. prior to this point. >> okay. thank you. >> governor inslee your response. >> i suggest we need to broaden our discussion. i would suggest think about a bigger scandal in america. which is that in professions and careers where women have been more than the majority, they have been almost always under paid. that is why this year i'm proud to be the governor who won the largest pay increase for educators in the united states. and i believe that is long over due. i think it is true for nursing staff as well. i'm glad we have passed a measure and i'm glad that we of have increased union membership 10%. >> i want to turn to foreign policy. if we can.
senator booker, 14,000 u.s. service members if in afghanistan now. if elected will they still be in afghanistan by the end of your first year in office? >> first of all i want to say clearly that i will not do foreign policy by tweet. as trump does all the time. a guy that tweets out that we're pulling troops out before the generals know about it is creating a dangerous situation for our troops. in places like afghanistan. so i will bring our troops home and i will bring them home quickly as possible. i will not set during a campaign an artificial deadline. we will do it expeditiously and safely. to not create a vacuum that will disstabilize the midlt east and create the environment for terrorism to threaten the nation. >> you're the only veteran on the stage. please respond. >> this is real in a way that's very difficult to convey in
words. i was deployed to iraq in 2005. in a field medical unit where every day i saw the cost of war. just this past week two more soldiers were killed in afghanistan. my cousin is deployed now. 300 of the hawaii national guard soldiers are deployed. 14,000 members are there. it's not about arbitrary deadlines this is about leadership. the leadership i will bring to do the right thing to bring our troops home. within the first year in office. because they shouldn't have been there this long. for too long we had leaders who have been arbitrating foreign policy from ivory towers in washington. without any idea about the cost and the consequence the toll it takes on our service members. on their families. we have to do the right thing. and end the wasteful regime change wars and bring our troops home. >> thank you. mr. yang.
iran has breeched the terms of 2015 nuclear deal after president trump withdrew the u.s. from the deal. that puts iran closer to building a nuclear weapon. the ability to do so. you have said if iran violates the agreement the u.s. would need to respond quote very strongly. how would a president yang respond right now? >> i would move to deescalate tensions in iran because they're responding to fact we pulled out of the agreement. it wasn't just us and iran. there were other world powers part of that. we have to try and reenter the agreement. renegotiate the time line. the time lines now don't make as much sense. i have signed a pledge to end the forever wars. right now our strength abroad reflects our strength at home. what happened really? we have fallen apart at home and elected trump. now we have an unpredictable relationship with lodge standing partners and allies. we have to invest the resources to solve the problems here at
home. we spent trillions of dollars and lost thousands of american lives in conflicts that have unclear benefits chls we have been in a constant state of war for 18 years. this is not what the american people want. i would bring the troop homes and deescalate tensions and put resources in our own communities. >> i think that these are matters of great and often difficult judgment. there is no sort of -- for presidents to read. we have to determine whether a potential president has adequate judgment in the decisions. i was only one of two members on this panel today who called to make a judgment about the iraq war. i was a new member of congress and i made the right judgment. because it was obvious to me that he was fanning the flames of war. we recognize we have a president
who would be willing to beat the drums of war. we need a president who can stand up against the drums of war and make rational decisions. that was the right vote. >> thank you. vice president biden he was obviously suggesting you made the wrong decision and had bad judgment. when you voted to go to war in iraq. as a u.s. senator. >> i did make a bad judgment. trusting the president saying he was only doing this to get inspectors in and get the un to agree. from the moment shock and awe started and that moment i was opposed to the effort and i was out spoken as much as anyone at all in the congress and administration. secondly, i was asked by the president in the first meeting we had on the iraq he turned and said get our combat troops out. in front of the entire -- the proudest moment of my life was stand there and tell all the troops are coming home. i oppose the surge in afghanistan. the long over due we should have
not in fact gone in the way -- >> thank you. i want to bring in the person on the stage who served. congresswoman gabbard. your response. >> we were all lied to. this is the betrayal. the betrayal to the american people. to me to me fellow service members. we were lied to. told hue sane had weapons of mass destruction and working with al qaeda and posed a threat to the american people. i enlisted after 9/11 to protect our country. to go after those who aa tacked on us and took the lives of thousands of americans. the problem is that this current president is continuing to betray us. we were supposed to be going after al qaeda. over years now not only have we not gone after al qaeda who is stronger today than 9/11. our president is supporting al qaeda. >> thank you.
let's talk about -- >> we didn't talk about iran. the march to war in iran now and we blew by it. >> follow the rules. >> mayor, thank you. >> we'll talk about another subject. i appreciate it. let's talk about now the former special counsel mueller appearance in front of congress last week. when asked whether or not the president could be charged with a crime after leaving office his answer was yes. senator harris, you have criticized president trump for interfering with the justice department and just last month said if you were elected president your justice department would have no choice and should go forward with obstruction of justice charges against former president trump. why is it okay for you to advocate for the justice department to prosecute somebody but president trump not him? >> i would never direct the department of justice to do whatever it believes it should do. listen, we all watched the testimony. i read the report. there are ten clear incidents of obstruction of justice. by this president and he needs
to be held accountable. i have seen people go to prison for far less. and the reality of it we have a person in the white house right now who has been shielded by a memo. in the united states department of justice that says the sitting president cannot be indicted. i believe the american people are right to say there should be consequence and accountability for everyone and no one is above the law including the president of the united states. >> senator booker, your response. >> my response is exactly that. i have read the report i read the redacted version. of the report. we have something that is astonishing going on in the united states of the america. a president that is not acting like the leader of free world. he's acting like an authoritarian against the constitution that he swore an oath to uphold. this is a difference with us on the debate stage. i believe that we in the united states congress should start impeachment proceedings. immediately. i'll tell you this, now has
joined my call for starting impeachment proceedings because he is now stone walling congress. not allowing subjecting himself to the check and balances we swore an oath to uphold the constitution. the politics of this be dammed. when we look at history at what happened when the president started acting like a authoritarian. the question is what will we have done? and i believe the congress should do its job. >> thank you. secretary castro. >> i agree. i was first of candidate to call on congress to begin impeachment proceedings. ten different incidents mueller pointded out when the president obstructed justice or attempted. they should go forward with impeachment proceedings. as for the question of the what the department would do. i agree a president should not direct an attorney general specifically to prosecute or not prosecute. however, i believe that the
evidence is plain and clear. and if it goats that far, you're likely to see a prosecution of donald trump. >> mayor de blasio, your response. >> it's obvious the president commit td the crimes worthy of impeachment. i want to caution fellow democrats. while with move for impeachment, we have to remember at the same time the american people are out there plooking for us to do something for them in their lives. what they see when they turn on the tv or online is just talk about impeachment. we need more talk about working people and their lives. for example are we really ready and i ask people this question, are we ready to make the wealthy pay their fair share in taxes? that's something they want answers to right now. move for impeachment. don't forget to do the peoples business and stand up for working people. that is how we're going to beat trump. the best impeachment is beating him in the election of 2020.
>> thank you. senator bennett how do you respond? >> as we go forward here we need to recognize a very practical reality. which is that we are four months -- we have the august recess. then we're four months from the iowa caucus. and i just want to make sure whatever we do, doesn't end up with an acquittal by mitch mcconnell in the senate and president trump is saying he was acquitted by the congress. i belief we have a moral obligation to beat donald trump. he has to be a single term president. and we can't do anything that plays into his hands. we were talking earlier about climate up here. it's so important. donald trump should be the last climate denier ever in the white house. >> thank you. secretary castro please respond. >> we need to be smart or we'll give him a second term.
>> i really do believe we can walk and chew gum at the same time. we have a vision for the future of the country that we're articulating to the people. we'll continue to do that. we have an election coming up. at the same time, i think that too many folks in the senate and congress have been spoofed by 1998. the times are different. folks are making a mistake by not seeking impeachment. he deserves it. and what will happen fall of next year if they don't impeach is he will say you see? the democrats didn't go after me on impeachment. you know why? because i didn't do anything wrong. the folks that always investigate me. always going after me. when it came down to it i didn't do anything wrong. if mitch mcconnell lets him off hook. we say sure they impeached him but his friend, moscow mitch. let him off the hook.
>> please respond. >> i don't disagree with that. we have to walk and chew gum at the same time. it's unusual for members of congress to be able to do that. and i'm glad that secretary castro has -- >> my brother can. he's here. >> your brother is given you that good feeling about the congress. that's what we should do. >> thank you. the debate continues after this. biopharmaceutical researchers.
driven each day to pursue life-changing cures... in a country built on fostering innovation. here, they find breakthroughs... like a way to fight cancer by
arming a patient's own t-cells... and a new therapy that gives the blind a working gene so they can see again. because it's not just about the next breakthrough... it's all the ones after that. (burke) at farmers insurance, we've seen almost everything, so we know how to cover almost anything. even a "three-ring fender bender." (clown 1) sorry about that... (clown 2) apologies. (clown 1) ...didn't mean it. (clown 3) whoops. (stilts) sorry! (clowns) we're sorry! (scary) hey, we're sorry! [man screams] [scary screams] (burke) quite the circus. but we covered it. at farmers, we know a thing or two because we've seen a thing or two. ♪ we are farmers. bum-pa-dum, bum-bum-bum-bum ♪
let's cowboy up! exhilarating speed. woo! precision control. woo! maximum reliability. access denied. [ repeats ] access denied. if it's not xfinity xfi, it's not good enough. for wifi with super powers, get xfinity xfi.
and go see, fast & furious presents, hobbs & shaw. august 2. welcome back to the cnn democratic presidential debate. it is time now for closing statements. you will each receive one minute. mayor blaz. >> for the last three years we watched trump pit working people against each ore. black vs. white. citizen vs. imgran. so the wealthy and powerful can hold the american dream mostage from everyone else. we can't let them get away wi it. if we're going to beat trump this party has to stand for something. the party of labor union. this has to be the party of universal healthcare. this has to be the party that's
not afraid to say out loud we're going to tax the hell out of th trump on queue will call us socialists. here's what i'll say to him. donald, you're the real socialist the problem is it's socialism for the rich. we here in the country, we don't have to take that anymore. we can fight back. if you agree that we can stand up to donald trump and stand up to the wealthy, go to tax the hel hell.com and join us. build a country that puts working people first. >> senator bennett. >> thank you. i want to say tonight is we have been here before as a country. we have faced challenges that we have actually even forget some of us tonight how hard people
fought and worked. how hard they organize the votes they had o to take. the people they had to get to the polls to make the country more democratic and fair kp free. we have a person in the white house with no appreciation of the history and doesn't believe in the rule of law. who doesn't believe in the independence of the judiciary. who doesn't believe that climate change is real. we have an incredible opportunity in front of us. all of us. to come together just as our parents and grandparents did before them, and face challenges even harder than the ones we face. only way we'll be able to do it is put the di visive politics of trump behind us and the devicive politics of the last ten years behind us. we need to come together united against a broken washington. make trump a one term president. and begin to govern the country again for our kids and our grand
kids who cannot do it for themselves. we have to do it for them. please join me at michael bennett.com. thanks for being here tonight. >> governor inslee. >> for decades we have kicked the can down the road on climate change. under trump, we face a looming catastrophe. but it is now too late. it is not too late. we have one last chance. when you have one chance in life, you take it. think about this. literally the survival of humanity on this planet in civilization is in the hands of the next president. and we have to have a leader who will do what is necessary to save us. that includes making this the top priority of the next presidency. i alone on this panel making a commitment that this will be the
organizing principle of the administration not the first day. but every day. and if you share my view of the urgency of this matter, i hope you'll join me. we are up against powerful special fossil fuel interest. it is time to stand up on our legs and confront the fossil fuel special interest. because that is our salvation. what it depends upon. i hope you consider going to jay inslee.com and join this effort. and i will close with this. i am confident and optimistic tonight even in the face of this difficulty, because i know we can biltd build a clean energy economy. we can save our children. and grandchildren. i know that we can defeat climate change. and we will defeat donald trump. this is our moral responsibility. and we will fulfill it. thank you.
>> senator gillibrand. >> donald trump has really torn apart the moral fabric of the country. dividing us on every racial line, every religious line. every economic line he can fine. i'm running for president because i i want to help people. i actually have the experience and the ability to do that. i brought congress together and actually made a difference in peoples lives. i also know how to beat donald trump. he has broken his promises to the american people. i have taken this fight directly to his backyard in michigan and ohio and pennsylvania. and goil to the places in the country. i will fight for your family. doesn't matter who you are or where you live. it doesn't matter who you love. because that's my responsibility. and i have done this before. i started out in a two to one
republican district. i won it twice. i never lost an election since. i bring people together electorally and legislatively. i get things done. we need a president who is not afraid of the big challenges of the big fight. there is no false choice. we don't need a liberal or progressive with the big ideas. or we don't need a moderate who can win back trump obama voters. you need someone who can do both. and that's who i am. please go to my web site and so i can make the next debate stage. >> congresswoman gabbard. >> trump and politicians in washington failed us. they continue to escalate tensions with other nuclear armed countries like russia and china. and north korea. starting a new cold war pushing us closer to the brink of nuclear catastrophe. now as we stand here tonight there are thousands of nuclear
missiles pointed at us. if we were to get an attack we have have 30 minutes before we were hit. and you would receive an alert like the one we received in hawaii last year. that would say, incoming missile. seek immediate shelter. this is not a drill. seek immediate shelter. this is not a drill. you would see as we did as my loved ones in hawaii did, there's no shelter. this is the warmonger hoax. there is no shelter. it's all a lie. as president i will end this insanity. it doesn't have to be this way. i will end the wasteful regime change wars. work to end the new cold war through the use of dmoem si to deescalate the tensions and take the trillions of dollars we have been wasting on wars and weapons and redirect the resources into serving the needs of our people right here at home. things like healthcare for all.
making sure everyone in the country has clean water to drink and clean air to breathe. investing in education. investing in our infrastructure. the needs are great as your president i will put your interest above all else. >> secretary castro. >> first of all let me say thank you to jake, dana and don and everybody here. and those watching. this election is all about what kind of nation we'll become. you and i stand on the shoulders of folks who have made beds and sacrifices. people that fought in wars and fought discrimination. folks that pick crops. and stood in picket lines. and they helped build the wonderful nation we live in today. donald trump has not been bashful in his cruelty. and i'm not going to be bashful in common sense and compassion. i believe that we need leadership that understands that we need to move forward as one
nation. with one destiny. and our destiny in the years to come is to be the smartest, healthiest, fairest, and the most prosperous nation on earth. if you want to help me build that america for the future. i hope you'll go to julian castro.com. and on january 20th, 2021. we'll say together, adios to donald trump. >> mr. yang. >> you know what the talking heads couldn't stop talking about about the last debate? not the fact i'm number four on the stage in national polling. it was the fact i wint wearing a tie. i wasn't wearing a tie. instead of automation in the future and the fact we automated away 4 million manufacturing jobs. hundreds of thousands in michigan. we're up here with make up on our faces and rehearsed attack lines. playing roles in the reality tv show. it's one reason why we elected a
reality tv star as president. we need to be laser focussed on solving the real challenges of today. like the fact that the most common jobs in america may not exist in a decade. or that most americans cannot pay bills. my flag ship proposal to freedom dividend put $1,000 a month into the hands of every american adult be a game changer for millions of american families. if you care more about your family and kids than my neck wear. enter your zip code and see what $1,000 a month would mean to your community. it's not left or right. the math is forward. and that is how we'll beat donald trump in 2020. >> senator booker. >> thank you. first i want to give a lot of thanks to the city of detroit. they're hosting us today and one of the reasons i respect the city is because it has ts
defiant love that i find in many american cities including detroit is turning around. because we let no one divide us. no one demean or degrade us or under estimate or worth. we pulled together and fought for common purpose and cause. that's the history of city. my mom was born in detroit. to a uaw worker. my grandfather pulled his family out of poverty in the depression. my grandmother joined him. opened a pool hall and a laundry matt right here in the city. that is the american dream. and so many of us have stories like that. but the dream of this country is under threat right now. my mom generation 95% of baby boomers did better than their parents. it's a coin toss. we have a real crisis in the country and the crisis is donald trump. but not only trump, i have a
frustration sometimes people the only thing they want is beat donald trump. that's the floor not the ceiling. not just focus on him he wants to take all the oxygen out of the room. it's when we focus on each other. and under r understand our common bonds and purpose to address our common pain is what is saved us before. it's going to save us now. that is the kind of leader that i'm going to be as president of the united states. not just uniting the democratic party. making sure that we put more indy visible back into the nation under god. if you belief like i do. go to cory booker.com and join the mission. >> senator harris. >> so in my background as attorney general of california, i took on the big banks.
who preyed on the homeowners. many of whom lost homes and will never be able to buy another. lt for profit colleges who preyed on students and put them out of the business. transnational criminal organizations that preyed on women and children. and i will tell you, we have a predator living in the white house. and i'm going to tell you something, donald trump has predatory nature and instincts. the thing about predators is this. by their very nature, they prey on people they perceive to be weak. they prey on people they perceive to be vulnerable. they prey on people who are in need of help often desperate for help. and predators are cowards. what we need is someone who is going to be object debate stage with donald trump and defeat him by being able to prosecute the case against four more years. we have a long rap sheet.
we're looking at someone who passed a tax bill benefitting the top 1% and biggest corporations when he said he would help working families. a person put babies in cages and separated children from parents. we have someone who passed a so called trade policy that was trade policy by tweet skb has resulted in tax on american families. so we must defeat him and then in turning the page, write the next chapter. for our country and that has to be written in a way that recognizes what wakes people up at 3:00 in the morning. that is any agenda. the 3:00 a.m. agenda on giving folks jobs they need. getting their children the education they knee. making sure they have the health care they need and the future they deserve. please join me at kamala harris.org. thank you for your time. >> vice president biden. >> thank you.
thank you for detroit hosting this. i have said it many times. everyone agrees with this. we're in battle for the soul of america. this most consequential election anyone of you has ever participated in. four more years of donald trump will go down as an aberration. hard to over come the damage he's done. we can over come it. eight more years of trump will change america in a fundamental way. the america we know will no longer exist. everybody knows who donald trump is. we have to let him know who we are. we choose science over fiction. hope over fear. we choose unity over division. and we choose the idea that we can as americans when we act together do anything. this is the united states of america. we have acted together we have never, never, ner be unable to over come whatever the problem
was. if you agree with me. go to joe 30330 and help me in this fight. thank you very much. >> candidates, thank you so much. we appreciate it. stay with cnn for a special coverage of tonight's debate. anderson cooper and chris cuomo are coming up. that begins right now. night two the cnn democratic debate here in detroit. once again, anyone wanting to know what separates democrats from donald trump and what separates those democrats on that stage from each other. certainly got plen it i of both tonight and plenty to think about. again tonight we saw sharp disa greemts on a number of subjects. a different and engaged
combative joe biden at times. especially towards california senator harris. it began with a kind of attempted mind trick. reading her on stage. the former vice president asking her to go easy on me kid. she did not. nor he on her. and not just with her. in part because he is the front runner national polls. and perhaps because hi opponents sense vulnerable after the last debate. senator harris and booker. castro and others directed much fire at joe biden. we'll talk about the hits about how well the former vice president handled them and who if anyone showed they were the one to take on donald trump. we'll talk to some of candidates and of course be joined by the best political and journalistic voices around. john king joining us here. cnn senior political reporter. is with us. ax files host. cnn chief political analyst with us.
and cnn political former clinton 2016 director of communication out reach. and former adviser to president obama. van jones. and two cnn comment at a timers. former governors. jennifer granholm of michigan. and virginia. for quick takes. what stood out. >> the big question, joe biden. unlike the first debate he got into the fight. and got into the mud. with harris on healthcare and booker on crime. with castro on immigration. got into the fight. his team will be happy he showed up and fired back. his performance over the two hours was uneven. he fumbled facts and picked a couple fights he didn't need to pick and had to answer. putting on the defensive. the question was would he show up, he did. he started the campaign on a pedestal. above the rest of the field. tonight proved he's with the field. that for joe biden has been the
problem the last two times he's run for president. breaking out when you're one of the pack. he started with an advantage. he's come back down into the group. >> the real winner was i think she's the best political athlete on the field. joe biden at times, he didn't seem like he wanted the ball. he gave up his time at times and didn't complete his thoughts. he wanted to just -- just kind of, you know, fade into the background at times. i thought kamala harris, who came in with big expectations because she had done so well in that first debate. i think she was very uneven. she never really seemed to settle in. she didn't seem to expect that she was going to get prosecuted on her prosecutorial record. and tulsi gabbard really went at her and she didn't i think make an affirmative case for her prosecutorial record. >> yeah. david axelrod? >> look, i think the good news for joe biden is this was maybe the best he could do and the bad news is this may be the best he could do. he was much better than last
time. he was much more engaged, but i agree with -- i agree with these -- with these guys. he had moments in which he was uncertain, where he was on the defensive. and the main thing he was -- he was the guy who was going to take on trump and bring it to trump and restore values and decency. that was what -- that's where he started in this race. tonight he had to be a gut fighter, and i think he paid some price for that. >> gloria? >> you know, the bar was so low for joe biden at the beginning of this debate that he had to do better than a lot of people expected he would do, and i think he did. i think he took it to kamala harris. what i -- what i really noticed was that he was having trouble when he had to choose between defending barack obama and the way the party has moved left. in order to appeal to those voters. and so, you know, he said, look, i was good enough for barack obama. i should be good enough for everybody here on this stage.
when he was asked about immigration and the deportation issue, he couldn't really figure out how to answer that question. and i think that will come up time and time again. >> it's also -- you wonder if elizabeth warren was on that stage how he, how some of the other sort of folks who were in the lead in the polls would fair against -- clearly her energy level. regardless of what you think about her politics. she is very, i mean, you know, she sat out here for, i don't know, 20 minutes last night taking all sorts of questions. there wasn't anybody with that same kind of policy chops and energy left on the stage tonight. >> we may see that in september. this field is going to shrink. some of that -- i think some of the second tier candidates did a much better job than the lower tier candidates did in the debate last night. will they move the polls? will they get more donors? we'll see that in the next week, ten days as democrats react. back to tonight. biden got back in the fight close your eyes to last night. bernie sanders and elizabeth warren defending their progressive positions. defending go big, go bold on all
these issues. joe biden got in the fight tonight but the question was the moderates last night tried and i would argue failed to counter the philosophical argument. the why are you doing this argument of warren and sanders. biden didn't do that tonight either. that was the question coming in. would he rise up? would moderate democrats, centrists like those two governme governors, would you close your eyes and see joe biden win a debate against elizabeth warren. tonight he did not. >> one of the demands of this process is to use these debates to tell a story. what is your vision? where do you want to lead? what are your values that are touchstones? elizabeth warren did that. whether you agree with her point of view or not, it was very clear where she's coming from. that's been very true throughout. >> you didn't get that sense from biden. >> no. >> also, kamala harris got a taste of what it's like to be a top tier candidate. she did very well last time. she was under fire this time. she also was uneven in her performance.
never got a big message off. >> he was too busy sort of swatting people away, and couldn't get to his central message about what he wants to do with -- for this country, except i was good enough for barack obama. >> yeah. he said that. >> and that isn't good enough for 2020. so he has to -- he has to get beyond that. maybe he felt that that wasn't his job at this debate. maybe his job was just to get through it unscathed. and that didn't happen. but, you know, i would have expected a little bit more. >> i think one of the questions is, and i came into the debate saying this, i thought he'd probably get a "c" but some people might see it as an a-plus because people are still invested in the idea of joe biden, the idea that he can go toe-to-toe with donald trump. the idea that he is still the most electable because folks in the midwest might vote for him. if he's this teflon candidate. a lot of this that is is not strong in debates is priced into him. >> let's go over to our partner,
governor, what did you make of it tonight? >> i think a lot of people thought biden was going to go out in a body bag. that did not happen. some people predicted he wasn't going to rise to the occasion. he did tonight. they attacked him on issues that were interesting. these were obama policies that democrats were attacking joe biden on. on the issue of deportation. on obamacare. that's very tricky to do. president obama has a 95% approval rating in the democratic party. so a lot of the hits i don't think really affected him. i thought cory booker had a great night. you know, he was the happy warrior tonight. and i think there is something to be said for that. do i worry with some of these debates the negativity between all these democrats, we got to get ready for a fall campaign and it's gotten a little nasty. you know, a lot of the things we hear tonight could come back and hurt us when we finally run against donald trump. so i was proud. i thought booker had a good night. i thought the attack on senator harris was one of the toughest i've ever seen. >> by tulsi gabbard?
>> absolutely. exculpatory evidence of people on death row. that is as tough as you can get. >> look, i think this was the opposite of last night. last night you had two stars at the center. warren and sanders. and they wipe the floor with all the lily -- this time the stars faded. biden did well enough to stop some of the fears, but not to give people that overwhelming confidence this is our guy. and kamala just didn't have it tonight. and instead, the people that were almost the afterthoughts came on like gangbusters. cory booker turned in a performance that reminded you why he's a household name. he was great on immigration. he was great on criminal justice. he was great on climate. he was happy. he was effective. you're like -- because up until now he looked like a guy with a great future behind him. so he bought himself a lifeline. also, gillibrand did great! >> i think that's right.
>> she did great! and nobody expecting her to do well. and i must say that andrew yang -- >> there you do. >> i agree. i agree. >> he did his thing. >> i agree. >> yang gang. >> i think that collective sound of sighing you hear are the sighs of relief of people in the democratic party who wanted joe biden to show up. and he did. i know he had -- there were a couple of rough moments, but, honestly, his opening was sharp, his closing was sharp. he had a great response i thought to bill de blasio, the sort of fourth moderator about -- about the tpp and trade. and he came forth in a strong way and in a state like michigan, that was really important in terms of whether he would support nafta 2.30. 2.0. so i thought joe biden did a great job tonight. >> you're interpreting those sighs. the sighs i've heard from some democrats is, is this all there
is? >> well, i'm stressed -- >> to quote peggy lee. is that all there is? >> from my perspective, i think there are a lot of democrats who said the bar was really low. he did bad in the first debate. they were all worried he was going to fall apart. he did not. he was the pinata. he had all of this incoming and he did -- he held his own. >> what i really needed to hear from biden and harris, what i was really excited about was their positive, proactive vision for the future. i didn't get that honestly from either of them. i thought harris handled the criticism really well. it's clear that the rest of the field considers her just as much of a threat at joe biden. but i think cory booker won this debate. >> cory booker was very positive. >> by being positive and by being the happy warrior. >> if i can jump in. to your point about biden. take your point and tie it to david's point. if this is the best he can do, can you see him against donald trump next october? >> let me beg your question. let me just beg it because if this is the best he can do, all he was doing was responding to incoming. this kind of --
>> that's what it's going to be against trump. >> i'm just saying he had ten people -- nine other people on there all with a different attack that he was supposed to respond to. >> right, but where -- >> translato >> i'm just saying that he did well given all of that. >> i agree with you. i agree with you except for one point, which is where is the inspiration? >> right. >> you're a democratic voter and you're looking out there and you've seen these 20 candidates after two nights and you're thinking, which is one of these people that i'm going to go out and knock on doors for? >> this -- this goes to the narrative piece. >> i'm going to go out and work my heart out for these people. >> yeah. >> which is the candidate? that you're willing to do that for? >> first of all, i will say cory booker was inspirational tonight. i think michael bennet had a couple of moments really inspirational as a former superintendent talking about criminal justice. i do think this was a joyless
debate. >> yeah. >> which is zbluunfortunate. >> let me say one thing about tulsi gabbard who had a great night. she spoke well to her generation. she took on kamala harris. listen, it's tough to take on a prosecutor. she took her on. on the death penalty, kamala has been mixed. she did take a very courageous stand in san francisco and not bring forward one of those death penalty cases. but later on she had the opportunity to essentially end the death penalty in california. she decided to not do that. and so when you have somebody like a tulsi gabbard, who is a soldier, who is a true believer, challenging someone like that, that's a big risk for tulsi gabbard. she pulled it off. i didn't think anybody could survive laying a glove on kamala harris. i would not lay a glove on kamala harris. and yet she did it and she survived. i think that says there is some steel in tulsi gabbard that is growing, and she actually made a difference tonight. >> well, we haven't heard -- i want to give jay inslee a good shout-out